risks associated with climate change 62. Therefore, CHRP cannot contribute to pro-environmental behavior for every worker. At hospital, PEB is especially arduous since hospital workers have great autonomy when they make a decision about whether to adopt a specific behavior according to their knowledge, experience, and power 28. Although excellent greatness has been achieved in recent years, individuals from all walks of life still need to improve their CHRP. Like other occupations, hospital workers spend a large chunk of time at workplaces, and their CHRP cannot always lead to actual PEB. Notwithstanding, the indirect effect of CHRP is crucial and should be given priority by reason of it can motivate individuals’ intentions, and then promote more and more behaviors.

Third, our results manifested that more PEA does not necessarily contribute to more PEB, which is contradictory to the TPB that proposes attitude can influence or determine behavior 24. In the field of environmental protection, plentiful studies have shown that environmental attitude exerts a significant impact on PEB such as green purchases 136, waste classification and recycling 137, and hotel employees’ green practice 138. At hospital, Widianto, Kautsar19 demonstrated that environmental attitude can explain and predict the disposal of medical wastes produced in the healthcare process. Apart from attitude related to environmental protection, there are still many factors that contribute to or impede behavior, such as environmental concern 139, health consciousness 140, job satisfaction 123, and altruistic values 18. Furthermore, hospital workers’ corporate social responsibility (CSR) is also important, which has multiple effects not only protecting human health but also reducing the carbon footprint generated by medical practices 141. Moreover, environmental knowledge can translate into pro-environmental behavior under certain circumstances, however, this knowledge could be affected by demographic elements such as gender 25. Additionally, the relationship between environmental attitude and PEB can be mediated or moderated by multiple elements such as organizational facilitators and barriers 17, altruistic values 18, and related knowledge 142. To sum up, the influencing factor of PEB is diverse, attitude alone cannot determine actual behavior.

Fourth, we found that there is a mediating role by PEI between CHRP and PEB. Based on the TPB, intention usually is regarded as a direct determinant of behavior, when the intention is strong and beneficial, the PEB will be adopted by people 24. Most research on PEI focuses on elucidating its direct impact on behavior, for example, Carfora, Caso 143 used a longitudinal design approach to assess the role of intention in the prediction of actual behavior. Wu, Font 26 demonstrated that environmental intention during holiday also makes an elusive impact on environmental behavior at home. Merely considering the direct effect is far from enough, and there is an obvious intention-behavior gap that needs further exploration, hence, the mediating role of intention becomes an emerging research topic. Consistent with past research, environmental intention is a vital mediator variable between other factors and environmental behavior, for instance, Liu, Teng 25 proved the mediating role of environmental intention in the process of environmental knowledge translates into pro-environmental behavior. Likewise, Sabri, Razak 144 also claimed that intention plays an important mediating role regarding to Malaysian public employees’ environmental behavior. Whether it is a direct effect or a mediating effect, we can claim that PEI is a powerful and significant predictor of PEB. However, decision-making about adopting PEB is a complicated process and is fundamentally a people process 145. Meanwhile, this accepted fact also promulgates the reason why CHRP has an insignificant impact on PEB in our study. In conclusion, the relationship among CHRP, PEI, and PEB is strong and can be applied to predict actual behavior.

Finally, the result of multiple linear regression analysis indicated that different demographic variables have different effects on hospital workers’ CHRP, PEA, PEI, and PEB. Specifically, compared with males, females are more inclined to display more PEA and PEI, and then perform more PEB, which is consistent with the study of Swim, Gillis 146, Ahmad, Ullah 23, Singleton, Lau 17, and Wei, Sial 141. The social role theory-individuals incline to possess diverse roles and perform different behavior in the same social setting-can illustrate these differences between genders, females are more concerned about environmental issues and have a stronger willingness and belief to relieve or reverse them 23,141. Therefore, the goal of mitigating and adapting to climate change can be a reality with the active participation of females. Moreover, we found that length of employment is meaningful, hospital workers who have worked for 6–15 years are more aware of the severity of environmental issues and adopt more PEB in their work every day. Consistent with one study to evaluate determinants of employees’ pro-environmental behavioral intentions, which takes the length of employment into consideration and demonstrate it can change intention 147. It has become general knowledge that length of employment is positively correlated with age. According to Singleton, Lau 17, young people tend to show more concern regarding to environmental issues and are likely to adopt more environmental protection measures. The finding resulting from the comparison of different departments is overarching, we observed higher PEA, PEI, and PEB in departments such as the department of hospital infection management, the department of prevention care, and the department of publicity. Different from clinical departments that diagnose and treat diseases, these departments protect human health through the management and prevention diseases 148. Hence, hospital workers in these departments may possess higher PEA and PEI, and adopt more PEB. However, there are no significant differences in terms of CHRP among the three demographic groups. Up to now, although health effects from climate change are noteworthy, health risk perception is little-known, and the study related to it is also rare 149. Therefore, it is urgent to understand the current situation of CHRP, and why it does not directly contribute to PEB at hospital. The study focusing on CHRP may help to create a new starting point for the implementation of actual PEB.

# Conclusion

The main aim of this study was to explore how climate change health risk perception (CHRP) shapes pro-environmental attitude (PEA), pro-environmental intention (PEI), and pro-environmental behavior (PEB) among hospital workers. This study presented a chain of causation from CHRP to PEB using SEM conducted by AMOS 26.0. The results indicated that CHRP has a significant positive effect on PEA and PEI, and PEI has a significant positive effect on PEB. Additionally, the indirect effect of CHRP on PEB was also significant, which was mediated.