Frone et al.

that there is no cure for SUDs and allows for the possibility of multiple cycles of treatment, symptom remission, symptom recurrence, and reestablishment of treatment and self‑management before a person achieves stable recovery (Arria & McLellan, 2012; Dennis & Scott, 2007; White & Kelly, 2001). Although brief interventions as part of acute care may benefit individuals with mild to moderate SUDs, those with severe SUDs (i.e., addiction) will benefit most from longer‑term recovery‑oriented systems of care (Office of the Surgeon General, 2016).

A cycle of treatment, symptom remission, symptom recurrence resulting from nonadherence with treatment regimens, and reestablishment of treatment and self‑management is not unique to SUDs (Arria & McLellan, 2012). This cycle also is observed with other chronic medical disorders for which there is no cure. For example, the symptom recurrence rate due to nonadherence with treatment regimens for SUDs (40–60%) is similar to that for Type 1 diabetes (30–50%) and both hypertension and asthma (50–70%) (McLellan et al., 2000; O’Brien & McLellan, 1996). Therefore, contrary to beliefs sometimes held by the general public and some medical professionals, the recurrence of symptoms during or after SUD treatment is not a sign of failure (Dennis & Scott, 2007). Instead, it is consistent with other chronic disorders requiring a lifelong commitment to treatment regimens and indicates that treatment needs to be reinstated or adjusted or alternate treatment may be needed (Arria & McLellan, 2012; Office of the Surgeon General, 2016).

# Recovery Theme 5: Recovery is Supported by Reducing Stigma and Promoting Accurate and Positive Portrayals of Persons with SUDs

Having a SUD or being in recovery from a SUD can lead to broad exposure to stigma and discrimination by the general public and healthcare providers, and may be experienced in many environmental contexts, including the workplace (Livingston et al., 2012; Rasinski et al., 2005; Roche et al., 2019; Schomerus et al., 2011; van Boekel et al., 2013; Vilsaint et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2017). This stigma and discrimination may undermine access to treatment, treatment initiation, and sustainability of recovery efforts. To avoid perpetuating stigma and discrimination and allow individuals with active SUDs or in recovery to transcend stigma, White & Kelly (2001) suggested that discussions of SUDs as a chronic condition should provide the following disclaimers:

“Characterizing addiction as a ‘chronic disorder’ does not mean that (1) all AOD [alcohol and other drug] problems have a prolonged, progressive course, (2) all persons with AOD problems need specialized professional treatment and long‑term posttreatment monitoring and support, (3) all persons suffering from substance dependence will relapse repeatedly and require multiple treatment episodes, (4) there is minimal hope for full, long‑term recovery, or (5) that persons with a chronic form of substance dependence have any less personal responsibility for illness self‑management than those with diabetes or hypertensive disease” (p. 69).

Several articles from a national study of U.S. adults in recovery support the broad experience of discrimination and many of these disclaimers. Vilsaint et al., (2020) reported a high prevalence of perceived discrimination among individuals in recovery (discussed in more detail later). Kelly et al., (2017) found that 46.1% of those who resolved a substance use

Occup Health Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 May 18.