Frone et al.

than half of employers endorsed a non‑stigmatizing response supportive of treatment and recovery—returning the employee to their original position after appropriate treatment—44% for alcohol, 40% for prescription drugs, and 26% for illegal drugs. Also, more than half of employers endorsed a response that may foster stigma and undermine the initiation of treatment and the sustainability of recovery—carefully monitor employee for the rest of his/her employment with the company, relocate the employee to a position of lesser responsibility, or dismiss the employee—52% for alcohol, 51% for prescription drugs, and 69% for illegal drugs.

Manning & White (1995) asked employers whether they believed the medical diagnosis in sick notes for employees on sick leave. Believing that an employee was legitimately off work sick because of physical illness was reported by 82% of employers. However, only 63% of employers believed that an employee was genuinely ill with a psychological illness (depression, schizophrenia, alcoholism). When asked if they would dismiss an employee who developed a disorder during their employment, the proportion saying no was 13% for alcoholism, 15% for schizophrenia, and 23% for depression. These results suggest that relatively few employers would retain an employee who developed a disorder, and consistent with information discussed earlier, those with a SUD are among the most stigmatized.

Furthermore, workplace stigma extends beyond those with active SUDs, including individuals in recovery. Although Baldwin et al., (2010) found that individuals who recovered from a SUD were as likely to be employed and work full‑time as individuals with no history of a SUD, they also found higher rates of involuntary job loss among those who recovered from a SUD than among those with no SUD history. This pattern of findings might result from the visibility of the former SUD.

Goffman (1963) discussed a distinction between visible (race, physical disability) and invisible (SUDs, major depression) stigmas. Individuals with a visible stigma are discredited because their stigma is readily discernible by others. In contrast, those with an invisible stigma are discreditable but not discredited until their stigma becomes disclosed to others. The Baldwin et al., (2010) findings are consistent with former SUDs representing an invisible stigma during the hiring process. It is unlikely that a job applicant will disclose a former SUD in this situation to avoid discrimination in hiring. Therefore, obtaining employment may not be affected by a former SUD. Once employed, however, a former SUD may become either involuntarily or voluntarily disclosed. Any stigmatization that follows may adversely affect the individual’s employment experience and productivity outcomes (lower performance and more absenteeism), eventually leading to involuntary termination. Unfortunately, Baldwin et al., (2010) did not have information on the former SUD’s disclosure status.

However, a national study of individuals who recovered from a SUD addressed the disclosure issue. Vilsaint et al., (2020) asked participants if they had experienced various types of micro‑ and macro‑discrimination “because someone knew about your alcohol or drug use history” (p. 3). The most common micro‑discriminations were others expecting the person to relapse (49%), social exclusion (being ignored—30%; being avoided—36%), adverse interpersonal treatment (treated less favorably—37%, disrespected—34%, treated

Occup Health Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 May 18.