Frone et al.

Author Manuscript

occupational health researchers. A better understanding of SUDs, SUD recovery, and the workplace’s potential influence can benefit the development of future research, effective policies and programs, and interventions to promote and sustain recovery among employees facing a SUD.

To address this general goal, we begin by reviewing the nature of a SUD, definitions of SUD recovery, and summarize broad themes in the recovery process. Second, we offer a working definition of workplace supported recovery. Third, we present a conceptual model showing how the workplace might impact the SUD recovery process. Fourth, using this model and research from the addictions and occupational health literatures, we outline a series of general research propositions to guide future research on how work conditions may support or undermine the process of employee SUD recovery. Although some researchers have advocated for organizations to support workplace SUD prevention and recovery efforts as a form of corporate social responsibility (Radacsi & Hardi, 2014), the proposed research agenda may produce a robust evidence base to inform and support the development and evaluation of workplace policies and interventions that assist individuals with SUDs in initiating and sustaining their recovery efforts.

# What is a Substance Use Disorder?

In the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM‑5), the American Psychiatric Association presents 11 criteria for the diagnosis of a SUD that fall into four general categories (American Psychiatric Association, 2013): physical symptoms (tolerance—need to consume more to get the same effect and decreased effect with the same amount; withdrawal—experiencing withdrawal when use is reduced and using to avoid withdrawal; craving—strong desire to use a substance), loss of control (using more of a substance or for a longer period than intended; inability to cut down or stop using a substance), forsaking meaningful activities (spending much time using, obtaining, or being affected by a substance; giving up or reducing central life activities), and problems related to use (failure to meet role obligations; continued use despite social problems; continued use despite physical or psychological problems; using in physically hazardous situations). These criteria apply to all psychoactive substances (e.g., alcohol, cannabis, opioids, stimulants, and other drugs), representing chemical compounds that act primarily on the central nervous system, resulting in changes in consciousness, perception, emotion, cognition, or behavior (Frone, 2013, 2019).

Based on the DSM‑5, a SUD can range in severity from mild (2–3 criteria) to moderate (4–5 criteria) to severe (6 or more criteria). The term addiction often is used to characterize the severe end of the SUD spectrum (National Institute on Drug Abuse, 2018; Office of the Surgeon General, 2016). The National Institute on Drug Abuse defines addiction as follows:

A chronic, relapsing disorder characterized by compulsive drug seeking and use despite adverse consequences. It is considered a brain disorder because it involves functional changes to brain circuits involved in reward, stress, and self‑control, and those changes may last a long time after a person has stopped taking drugs (National Institute on Drug Abuse, 2018, p. 4).

Occup Health Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 May 18.