# Community Mental Health Journal (2022) 58:205–212

The practice of psychiatry has changed in the neoliberal era. The publication of the DSM III in 1980 shifted psychiatry from psychodynamic approaches of describing mental illness into a more biological domain that established descriptive categories of subjective states (Davies, 2017). The pharmaceutical industry worked to link the DSM descriptive diagnoses to biological abnormalities and began to promote biological psychiatry by investing in public health campaigns, funding individual psychiatrists supportive of the biological approach, and financing nearly all clinical trials into psychiatric medication (Davies, 2017). Treating psychiatric illness through medication is also more cost effective as a clinician can now see 3–4 people in the space of a 1 h session and is therefore favored by profit driven health insurance companies (Davies, 2017). Some of these changes were driven by profits but they also worked to legitimize the neoliberal social order (Cohen, 2017; Davies, 2017).

The DSM III increased the number of mental disorders from 182 to 265, which medicalized subjective experiences that had previously fallen outside of the psy-professional domain (Cohen, 2017). The DSM itself went beyond psychiatry as it started being used not only in clinical settings but also in courts, research, insurance reimbursement, managed care, and for patients to self-diagnose (Cohen, 2017). It has been used in our society at large to categorize people as “normal” or “sick” (Cohen, 2017). This constitutes a larger shift of social order being dictated by civil society rather than by direct authority by the state (Cohen, 2017). Psychiatry is particularly powerful because it dictates what is a “normal” or “abnormal” response to life stressors (Cohen, 2017).

These distinctions are inherently biased because they are based on the assumptions of market principles as rationality (Cohen, 2017; Esposito & Perez, 2014). Definitions of normal and abnormal mental states are defined by cultural factors and those who are upset by the status quo may be labeled as mentally ill even when existing circumstances are unjust. An example of this was the increased rates of schizophrenia in African American males during the civil rights era who were described by psychiatrists at the Ionia State Hospital as delusional and paranoid when they spoke out about racial injustice (Metzl, 2011).

Outside of psychiatric institutions, neoliberal health and wellness discourses allow for a more subtle social control that governs people’s behavior at a distance and encourages people to self-monitor for symptoms of mental illness that can be diagnosed and corrected to maximize a person’s own productivity (Cohen, 2017; Esposito & Perez, 2014).

As psychiatric discourse expanded, so have the number of symptoms that constitute as mental illness leading to the medicalization of normal responses to the stressors of life under neoliberal capitalism (Cohen, 2017; Moncrieff, 2001). This has allowed for further enforcement of ruling class values and self-regulation (Cohen, 2017).

Furthermore, the diagnosis of a mental illness is often contingent upon negatively affecting a person’s performance at work, school or home indicating that being unsuccessful within the neoliberal order is an individual illness needing to be corrected rather than a problem with the social order itself (Cohen, 2017; Esposito & Perez, 2014).

More recently, the idea of psychiatric illness as a strictly biological neurochemical imbalance has shifted to a biopsychosocial model that takes things such as social circumstance and life experience into a formulation for an individual’s experience. However, prescribing medication and individual psychotherapeutic intervention to help our patients become more successful in the neoliberal capitalist society perpetuates the idea that they are ill and defective for not assimilating to it (Cohen, 2017; Esposito & Perez, 2014).

This not only reinforces ideals of individualism but absolves people in power from the responsibilities for the social conditions and injustices that contribute to distress (Thomas et al., 2020). Furthermore, the primary solution to people who may be depressed or anxious is medication, a product that is advertised as a way for people to be more competitive and successful, thereby perpetuating consumerism (Esposito & Perez, 2014).

Unfortunately, as providers, individualized treatment with medication and psychotherapy are often the only options we’re able to offer because modifying a person’s social environment and changing policy is outside of our capabilities in the clinic (Esposito & Perez, 2014).

The cost of health insurance and treatment is also a barrier for access to mental healthcare, often causing patients to wait to see a provider until an emergency occurs. Nearly 60 million adults and children living with mental illness go without treatment in the United States due to high rates of denial of care by insurance providers, high out-of-pocket costs, and problems finding in-network providers (The Doctor-is-Out, n.d.).

The privatization of healthcare in the United States has caused costs to rise much higher than healthcare costs in other countries, yet health outcomes and life expectancy are worse (Case & Deaton, 2020). Although citizens, politicians, and healthcare providers have advocated for a publicly-funded healthcare system, advocates are overpowered by healthcare lobbyists (Case & Deaton, 2020).

In 2018 the healthcare industry spent more than $567 million dollars on lobbying, with more than half of the contributions coming from pharmaceutical companies (Case & Deaton, 2020). Health care is considered a commodity rather than a social right and as a result there is disproportionate access to healthcare so that the unemployed or underemployed do not have access to healthcare and therefore have worse outcomes (Nkansah-Amankra et al., 2013). Poor health is also a major contributor to poverty since healthcare can be costly (Nkansah-Amankra et al., 2013).