# International Journal for Educational and Vocational Guidance

competence, self-efficacy, career resilience, sociability, business orientation, and proactivity (Bezuidenhout & Coetzee, 2010). The Employability Scale evaluates search efficiency, search difficulty, optimism, and responsibility (Campos, 2011). The Employability Appraisal Scale assesses job protection, job risk and job-seeking behaviors, self-control, and self-learning (Llinares-Insa et al., 2018). Lastly, the Short-Form Employability Instrument measures professional experience, anticipation and optimization, personal flexibility, corporate sense, and balance (Van der Heijden et al., 2018).

To our knowledge, the Multidimensional Measure of Employability (MME) is the only measure that assesses employability resources. The MME is grounded on Lo Presti and Pluviano’s (2016) definition of employability as a “personal resource that individuals develop across their working lives aimed at increasing one’s career success” (p. 5). In this model, employability is conceived as a mindset that develops over time and thus results in different actions aimed to develop its distinct dimensions. This dynamic process depends on the importance given to certain aspects (i.e., networking) and the efforts made to achieve one’s career goals (Lo Presti & Pluviano, 2016). Employability is thus seen as an instrumental resource rather than a competence or a belief. From this perspective, Lo Presti and Pluviano (2016) emphasized that employability enables individuals to overcome challenges and seize opportunities in the labor market.

The MME’s current form has 28 items answered in a five-point scale varying from 0 (not at all) to 4 (completely). The content was based on 15 interviews with experts in the field that assessed their opinions regarding employability and its facets. Exploratory and confirmatory factor analyses were carried out and the four-dimension internal structure proposed by Lo Presti and Pluviano (2016) was established. Human capital and professional development refers to individual resources that allow for the acquisition of knowledge, skills, and abilities that, in turn, may contribute to the achievement of career goals. Social capital and networking entails individual resources that stimulate the analysis of the context and the identification of potential relationships that may favor career success. Career identity and self-management embraces the individual resources that promote career awareness and enable one to make sense of past experiences and anticipate the future. Environmental monitoring pertains to individual resources that favor the acknowledgement of opportunities, restrictions, barriers, and requirements in the environment, as well as the selection of the best timing for decision-making (Lo Presti et al., 2019).

The reliability index of the employability dimensions and total scale was good (0.81 ≤ α ≤ 0.92) and the adjustment index of confirmatory analyses supported the four-factor hierarchical structure (chi-squared = 816.12, DF = 338, RMSEA = 0.04, CFI = 0.94, GFI = 0.93, NNFI = 0.94, SRMR = 0.04, ECVI = 1.36) (Lo Presti et al., 2019). The MME has been adapted to Portugal (Gamboa et al., 2022), with good validity and reliability evidence (Cronbach’s alpha between α = 0.74 and α = 0.94). However, the validation only considered adults in general and thus is not yet possible to confirm its suitability for the unemployed population.

To our knowledge, there are no measures specific for the assessment of employment resources among unemployed persons. Very recently, Lo Presti et al.