COVID-19’ (Atique et al. 2020, p. 2464; Tiirinki et al. 2020). In September 2020, the THL released the mobile contact tracing app Koronavilkku,1 which can collaborate with Omaolo by sharing information and informing the app of positive test cases (THL 2020, p. 14).

# Healthcare professionals and new decision-making conditions

With the increasing popularity of conversational agents in healthcare spaces involving the COVID-19 pandemic, medical experts (e.g. McGreevey et al. 2020) have become concerned about the consequences of these emerging technologies on clinical practices. It is unlikely that consultation chatbots, which are partially automated systems, can replace medical doctors in health care; however, they can drastically change the professional-patient relationship and decision-making processes in terms of diagnosis and treatment. One of the consequences can be the shift from operator to supervisor, that is, expert work becomes more about monitoring and surveillance than before (Zerilli et al. 2019). Complex algorithmic systems represent a growing resource of interactive, autonomous and often self-learning (in the ML sense) agency, potentially transforming cooperation between machines and professionals by emphasising the agency of machines (Morley et al. 2019). As a profound socio-digital change, partial ADM presumably transforms healthcare professionals’ work conditions, the skills required for jobs and, therefore, in the long run, the education system and re-arranges embodied and emotional relationships between professionals and customers. Thus, instead of only re-organising work, we are talking about systemic change (e.g. Simondon 2017), that is, change that pervades all parts of a system, taking into account the interrelationships and interdependencies among these parts.

The development—especially conceptual in nature—of ADM has one of its key moments in the aftermath of World War II, that is, the era of the Cold War. America and the Soviets were both keen (in their own ways) on finding ways to automatise and streamline their societies (including decision-making). As Erickson et al. (2013, p. 21) pointed out, ‘operations research, game theory, strategic deterrence, linear programming, decision theory, and the experimental social sciences all seemed to be converging on similar problems with similar tools and standards for what constituted a satisfactory solution’. This was led by people from different fields of science, who were reconceptualising human reason ‘as rationality’ (p. 29), thus creating formal models of functions and processes of biological and artificial organisms, firms, organisations and even societies. In the field of medical practice, probability assessments has been a recurring theme. Mathematical or statistical probability in medical diagnosis has become one of the principal targets, with the consequence that AI is expected to improve diagnostics in the long run. Hacking (1975) has reminded us of the dual nature between statistical probability and epistemic probability. Statistical probability is concerned with ‘stochastic laws of chance processes’, while epistemic probability.

1 https://koronavilkku.fi/en/