who would qualify for a diagnosis do not lead to spuri- ous positive results but rather would make any true positive effect more difficult to detect. Finally, it is possible that some of the diagnosed individuals take ADHD medication; the current question however is if there is a significant link between the ADHD and entre- preneurship (regardless of whether a diagnosed individ- ual is medicated). Furthermore, any significant results would not be an artifact of not controlling for whether a diagnosed individual was taking medication. Finally, in relation to possible use of medication, our study is consistent with the recent studies cited that refrain from attempting to capture and control for medication use. In summary, considering the above, any significant find- ings would likely be conservative in nature.

For straightforward tests of whether ADHD signifi- cantly increased the likelihood of entrepreneurial inten- tions and actions, ordinary least squares and logistic regressions were run—according to the nature of the dependent variable (continuous or dichotomous, respec- tively). In addition, we ran t tests examining potential differences between subgroups.

# 4 Results

The following are the results of the large-scale empirical inquiry conducted. Table 1 presents the descriptive sta- tistics and correlations.

Tables 2 and 3 present the results of the regression analyses. As Table 2 indicates, individuals with an ADHD diagnosis showed significantly higher entrepre- neurial intentions. This was the case whether operation- alized following Linan and Chen (2009) as a continuous variable, or following Verheul et al.’s (2015) dichoto- mous variable. In terms of the readily interpretable latter, individuals with ADHD were approximately 1.7 times (i.e., 60–80%) more likely to have entrepreneurial inten- tions (models 1c and 1d, odd ratios: 1.8, 1.6). This extends the findings of Verheul et al. (2015), assuaging the clinical-but-non-clinical disjuncture of prior research and validating the veridicality of the previously sug- gested positive link with intentions.

Even more interestingly, Table 3 reveals a significant positive link between ADHD diagnosis and venturing/ entrepreneurial action. In particular, having ADHD in- creases the odds of venturing by almost 100%. The results indicate that university enrolled adults with ADHD are almost two times more likely to initiate entrepreneurial action than those without ADHD (models 2a and 2b, odd ratios: 1.9, 1.8). In other words, among individuals who still have to make a vocational choice (and have yet to be pushed into venturing out of necessity/failure in wage employment), those with the disorder of ADHD were not less or similarly likely to venture than those without the disorder, but rather were significantly more likely to venture. Considering that individuals with ADHD are less likely to attend post-secondary educa- tion and may be pushed out of conventional employ- ment (e.g., Barkley et al. 2008), these results may un- derstate the true effect size relative to the overall popu- lation. Considering the design and nature of the sample, these results do not speak to venturing outcomes, nor stand to provide generalizable parameter estimates. Simply, the results provide a straightforward test and clear support for a positive link between ADHD and entrepreneurship, attributable to individual choice versus a vocation of last resort.

These results extend prior research and establish a potential upside or non-pathological effect of a clinical disorder. Given the research question, the significant positive effect of ADHD and the high associated odds ratios, indicative of a large effect, are the focus.

The low total variance explained rightfully indicates that there are myriad factors influencing whether an individual is interested and will engage in venturing. Moreover, given the representative but minority frequen- cy of individuals with ADHD diagnoses in the sample, the overwhelming majority of the sample does not have ADHD and, accordingly, low R2s are not just normal but mathematically ought to be observed.4 If around 4% of a sample has a dichotomous condition, and many individuals without the disorder also venture, looking at R2 is analo- gous to, for example, examining how much of the total probability of engaging in Corporate Acquisition activity is explained by a relatively uncommon predictor such as CEO ADHD. However, the research objective is not about explaining the broad preponderance of the depen- dent variable, but instead is about understanding whether a theoretically meaningful, yet relatively low base rate,

Low R2s are to be expected based on very limited variance in ADHD2 as a dichotomous predictor, especially when attempting to predict a relatively infrequent dichotomous variable. Any relatively minority (i.e., low base rate) feature, whether a clinical condition or otherwise, will not explain the vast preponderance of variance in a human activity such as entrepreneurship—considering such (as a dependent variable) is also engaged in by some of the overwhelming majority—that is, those without the low-frequency dichotomous feature.