D. A. Lerner et al.

et al. (2015) link a continuous indicator of ADHD-like behavior to entrepreneurial career intentions. We begin by first asking if the apparent ADHD—entrepreneurial intentions link indeed exists when considering the clinical condition. It is hitherto unclear whether, within a normal professional-oriented adult population, those who have ADHD show significantly higher entrepreneurial intentions than those without this condition. Potentially validating and extending prior research, we will empirically explore whether:

1. Individuals with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (a diagnosed condition) have higher entrepreneurial intentions than those without the condition.

# 2.4 ADHD and venturing/entrepreneurial action

Individual entrepreneurial action is central to entrepreneurship; without such, there would simply be no entrepreneurship and no new ventures (Baron 2007, p. 167). In regard to business venturing, entrepreneurial action is often defined by nascent entrepreneurial behavior, i.e., actions associated with business start-up such as opportunity development, making a prototype, and attempting to acquire start-up resources (Gartner, Carter, and Reynolds 2004; Reynolds et al. 2004). As there are myriad potential start-up behaviors, a straightforward indicator of whether entrepreneurial action has commenced is whether an individual is in the process of attempting to start or is already running a venture (e.g., Reynolds et al. 2004).

Considering ADHD as a clinical condition affecting individual behavior, we acknowledge that it could have opposing effects on one’s propensity to undertake entrepreneurial action (i.e., to venture). Although entrepreneurship is generally perceived to involve risky, complex, and innovative activities (something typically attractive to individuals with ADHD), the reality of starting a business may be far less exciting or motivating. In particular, starting a firm involves many tasks that are formal, protracted, administrative, and require attention to mundane detail (e.g., Lerner et al. 2018b). Individuals with ADHD tend to struggle with such activities and also perceive them as less attractive (Barkley 1997). Thus, when it comes to starting a venture and associated activities requiring sustained attention to details, individuals with ADHD may be apt to procrastinate such action or be otherwise distracted by more stimulating activities (including thinking about other opportunities/venture ideas). Following this line of reasoning, the classical pathological perspective on ADHD would suggest that individuals with ADHD may be less likely to venture, compared to individuals without ADHD.

Alternatively, considering that entrepreneurship requires an action orientation (Frese 2009; Sarasvathy 2001) and given that unfettered (even impulsive) action is central to ADHD (APA 2013), the opposite may be true. In individuals with ADHD, “act first, think later” behavior prevails, meaning action itself is often pre-potent (i.e., will be expressed in the absence of top-down restraint) (Barkley 1997). This suggests that, at least for experimenting with entrepreneurship, those with ADHD may very well act without much or any forethought or consideration of potential consequences. In this respect, ADHD’s disinhibition (Barkley 1997; Lerner 2016) promotes action. Consistent with this, Wiklund et al. (2016) document considerable entrepreneurial activity in their study of 14 entrepreneurs with ADHD. Likewise, in their sensitivity analysis, Verheul et al. (2016) find a positive link between a dichotomized score on the ASRS v1.1 screener and self-employment. Though the latter can be considered stricter than using continuous ASRS scores, the ADHD diagnostic status was entirely unknown. That is, a positive dichotomous score does not mean an individual has ADHD, but rather signifies that further evaluation by a clinician may be appropriate. Hence, neither the recent extant studies nor the extensive popular press provides conclusive empirical evidence of the central question whether ADHD increases (or decreases) the probability of venturing/entrepreneurial action.

Appreciating the ambivalent nature of ADHD (Lerner et al. 2018b), we note that early-stage venturing primarily involves initiating entrepreneurial action. Consequently, we offer but at the same time question the notion that individuals with ADHD—a clinical disorder—are more likely than others to venture. We will empirically examine whether:

1. Individuals with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (a diagnosed condition) are more likely to venture/engage in entrepreneurial action than those without the condition.