T. Jakobi et al.: The Role of IS in the Conﬂicting Interests Regarding GDPR, Bus Inf Syst Eng 62(3):261–272 (2020)

2017; Lambrinoudakis 2018). However, there is a lot of criticism remaining (Cvik et al. 2018).

Organizational and management research likewise seeks to uncover and address organizational and business needs with regard to GDPR. These include, for example, the new requirements to react to data breaches (Karyda and Mitrou 2016). Researchers also try to make use of existing structures and processes such as from the information security management system (ISMS) context, to make transition for organizations easier (Lopes et al. 2019). Notably, the interpretation of a risk-based approach as used in ISMS is also present in the GDPR (Gellert 2018). But even if compliance has been reached, organizations still need support in how to communicate the measures taken effectively (Fox et al. 2018).

From a technical perspective, GDPR also imposes technical challenges in information systems design, such as the implementation of making its system ‘‘forget’’ (Politou et al. 2018). Moreover, the implementation and benefits of different existing technical means such as pseudonymization or anonymization must be (re-)assessed with respect to demands in GDPR (Hintze and El Emam 2018).

On the individual level, likewise, the need for interpretation is high: The newly provided rights of the data subject are being studied, e.g., from a HCI perspective (De Hert et al. 2018; Alizadeh et al. 2019). At the same time, GDPR has also given new drive to almost traditional research topics such as privacy policies as well as the issue of ‘‘informed consent’’ (Politou et al. 2018; Utz et al. 2019) and how to design for transparency (Jakobi et al. 2019a). Also, in absence of the ePrivacy regulation, online tracking has come to focus on the context of GDPR (Degeling et al. 2018; Ermakova et al. 2018; Schelter and Kunegis 2018; Jakobi et al. 2019b; Mhaidli et al. 2019).

The margin opened up is also noticeable with regard to law research, where GDPR was and is heavily debated (De Hert and Papakonstantinou 2016; Mitrou 2017): The new regulation must be brought in line and act in concert with existing legislation (Diker Vanberg and U¨ nver 2017). The role of certification mechanisms as a regulatory instrument is one major concern here (Lachaud 2018). While the aforementioned contributions stem from a certain research field or perspective, they are not only interesting, but also highly relevant for the respective other ones, because of the fact that handling the GDPR is a multi-stakeholder task by nature.

In this contribution to the ongoing discussion of the future of BISE and its relation to GDPR, we have summoned renowned experts from the fields of law, customer protection, economics, organizational and information sciences, as well as human–computer interaction to talk about how BISE research is interdependent with the GDPR in terms of contributing to an understanding of how to interpret regulation in the practice of BISE. We will particularly look at the question of which role BISE should take in the ongoing application and interpretation of GDPR. What are – before the background of its fields of expertise – meaningful, yes perhaps necessary contributions that the community can perform or must perform in the context of the GDPR? What can a research agenda therefore look like with respect to GDPR?

For contributing to an answer to these questions, we summarize the discussion initially held at the 14. Internationale Tagung Wirtschaftsinformatik (WI2019) in Siegen, Germany, supplemented with additional insights from further perspectives of academia in the field of BISE. While previous sections of this discussion section have looked at digitalization as a technological mega-trend (Legner et al. 2017; Riedl et al. 2017; Urbach et al. 2019), this time the regulatory reaction shall be discussed regarding the implications for both economy and academia, and BISE in particular. In this regard, this updated summary especially provides the multitude of perspectives necessary to cover such an interdisciplinary issue as data protection is reflected by contributions from numerous fields. All experts share the notion that data protection is an important component of a modern society, but they may differ in how to practically apply data protection regulation.

# The EU General Data Protection Regulation Outside the Box: Competitive Advantages and Openness to Innovation

Maximilian von Grafenstein, University of Arts Berlin, Einstein Center Digital Future

Long before its application in May 2018, the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) triggered numerous controversies (De Hert and Papakonstantinou 2016). The excitement about the GDPR is based on the novel regulatory approach, which follows from the special nature of its subject matter and environment. At first glance, the GDPR may regulate the processing of personal data. At second glance, however, this law is about controlling the risks that arise for people when data that relates to them is processed (Albrecht 2016). Furthermore, recognizing the dynamics of data-driven innovation as an essential element of our digital society, all involved actors – from the legislator and data protection authorities up to data controllers, processors and data subjects – face similar knowledge uncertainties. This understanding goes hand in hand with a fundamental change in the regulatory approach of the GDPR itself and its interpretation (Zarsky 2016). Business informatics (BI) can make a significant contribution to this change.