# International Journal of Disaster Risk Science

“groups and individuals who have a stake in the success or failure of a business” (Freeman et al. 2010, p. xv) even if they do not have a legitimate “share” in it. This is because there are always individuals without direct ownership or involvement in a business that can nevertheless be significantly affected, either positively or negatively by its actions. This stakeholder perspective has become widely accepted as a desirable template for public-sector organizations. Public sector organizations now widely acknowledge that individuals within the larger community who may be directly or indirectly affected by its services have a legitimate stake in the organization’s policy making and implementation activities.

Consequently, stakeholder theory has gained traction in public administration to encourage stakeholder engagement in formulating and implementing government healthcare policies (Heath and Norman 2004). This inclusive approach aims to improve safety, health, and overall well-being. Numerous academic contributions have explored the relationship between public engagement and the application of stakeholder theory within the public sector. For example, Foo et al. (2011) studied the relationship between stakeholder engagement and compliance culture; Greco et al. (2015) examined the effects of public stakeholder engagement on sustainability; Elliott et al. (2020) explored stakeholder salience about organizational performance; and Mitchell (2022) attempted to establish a link between stakeholder support and strategic implementation. However, despite such helpful studies of the effect of the stakeholder approach in public sector organizations, an important aspect that is largely overlooked is the existence of power imbalances in an epistemic environment of stakeholders that can affect their active participation. Not all stakeholders operate on an equal footing, and this imbalance affects their access to communication channels, information, knowledge, and opportunities for interaction, and hence active engagement in decision-making processes. Reed et al. (2018) suggest that addressing power dynamics is essential for achieving more equitable engagement outcomes. The recognition that material differences exist among the public in terms of access to information, knowledge, and interactional opportunities, that communication channels are not equitably distributed, and that participation and engagement may therefore be restricted has been termed “epistemic injustice” (Fricker 2007). Epistemic injustice is an injustice that harms an individual’s ability to know things and to be recognized by others as a credible knower and participant. It is often associated with exclusion, silencing, and the prejudicial distortion or misrepresentation of an individual’s authentic views.

In this study, we used the example of vaccine hesitancy among the African, Caribbean, and Black communities (henceforth ACB) in response to the United Kingdom’s nationwide Covid-19 vaccination program to illustrate the limitations and failure of the stakeholder approach when power imbalances and variability of access through exclusion, silencing, and/or prejudicial distortion, are not adequately addressed during the formulation of public health policies. We show how inattention to the issue of “epistemic injustice” can thwart the effectiveness of public health policy making and implementation. During the different phases of the recent Covid-19 pandemic, the United Kingdom government and its devolved administrations, including Scotland, implemented distinct strategies to address the various health and social challenges.

Initially, Covid-19 response focused on virus suppression through lockdowns, face coverings, and social distancing regulations. The development and approval of Covid-19 vaccines within the scientific community prompted a strategic policy shift, emphasizing evidence-based measures for population protection. In response to this transition, certain lockdown restrictions in Scotland were eased, enabling a return to workplaces and public gatherings with specified precautions, including the continued use of face coverings in specific settings and ongoing monitoring of virus transmission. Nevertheless, the practical implementation of vaccines and treatments within local communities encountered challenges related to public perception and acceptance, stemming from fear, distrust, and perceived injustices—a phenomenon not exclusive to Scotland. However, evidence from the United Kingdom (UK) and the United States (US) indicates that individuals belonging to Black and other ethnic minority backgrounds, historically subjected to systemic inequalities, face an elevated susceptibility to harm during the Covid-19 pandemic. This includes contracting the Covid-19 virus and being impacted by the Covid-19 response measures put in place to curb the virus, including the national lockdown rules, policies, and communications in the UK (Katikireddi et al. 2021; Marrett et al. 2021). This leads to disproportionate effects such as increased levels of death (Phiri et al. 2021), hospitalization, mental health problems (Mahmood et al. 2021), and socioeconomic challenges (Burgess et al. 2022) among Black and other ethnic minority communities (Abuelgasim et al. 2020; Boserup et al. 2020; Kirby 2020).

Vaccine hesitancy describes the intentionally delayed response in accepting vaccination or refusing to be vaccinated despite their availability (MacDonald 2015). Data from Public Health Scotland in 2022 indicated a discernible trend of vaccine hesitancy within the ACB communities, exacerbating over time and resulting in increasingly unfavorable outcomes regarding hospitalizations and Covid-19-related deaths for the communities. For example, during the first quarter of 2022, the Covid-19 vaccine uptake among the African group was notably low at 41.7%, in contrast to the White ethnic group’s uptake at 75.4%. This underscored the persistent challenges in achieving meaningful vaccine engagement among ACB communities after initiating the Covid-19 vaccination program. These statistics indicate