# Philosophy of Management

Domination and obedience become (Shin 2012), and the more the culture of business will reflect and reinforce the “dictatorships” Anderson identifies.

One central argument supporting a market economy relies on the assumption that people know their own preferences, desires, goals, opportunities, and so on better than do uninvolved third parties (Hayek 1945; Infantino 2003; Pennington 2011). As Adam Smith frames the claim: “What is the species of domestick industry which his capital can employ, and of which the produce is likely to be of the greatest value, every individual, it is evident, can, in his local situation, judge much better than any statesman or lawgiver can do for him” (WN, p. 456). Yet as the discipline of behavioral economics has shown, people suffer from numerous cognitive biases that lead them to make decisions that are not, in fact, in their best interests—even as judged by themselves, or in the light of their own ends or goals (Kahneman 2011; Kahneman and Tversky 1991; Thaler and Sunstein 2009; Thaler 2015).

The argument here, however, presses a related but distinct point. Not only might workers be making mistakes in reasoning, but even if they are making perfectly rational choices, they may be doing so under artificially limited or even counterproductive constraints. Even if workers were not biased in any of the various ways behavioral economists have been identifying, their decisions might still reflect the peculiar—and problematic—norms and conventions to which they have become acculturated. If those norms and conventions that bosses enable are, as Anderson argues, dictatorial and dominating, then workers might develop sensibilities and sentiments appropriate to such constraints—and become precisely the subservient and obedient workers that their bosses desire and the prevailing culture of business rewards. Workers may not only be dominated by their bosses but might expect and allow, or even welcome, the dominance as appropriate.

In this way, we submit that Smith’s argument about the process that gives rise to one’s preferences, wishes, and desires—and indeed, in a deep sense, to one’s personality—can prove much more worrisome than one might initially have thought, and perhaps even than Smith himself realized, given that his suggested remedy was merely education enabling people to read, write, and account. Not only can certain kinds of work be mind-numbing and tedious (certain jobs in garment and other factories, simple online work done repeatedly, and so on), leading to mental “torpor” and so on, but workers can also become so thoroughly socialized by the dominance dynamic that they are no longer able to envision a work life without it. They may be free in the “negative” sense that no one is actively injuring them or positively interfering with or preventing them from making choices. But they remain unfree because their supervisors no longer need to so interfere or prevent. Acculturated workers do it to themselves, all on their own. This dominance dynamic might be quite common, infecting in some degree a substantial proportion of the roughly thirty million firms in the United States (SBA 2021).

To say this is not to deny that business unfreedom might come in degrees.17 Although Smith wrote about conditions in firms smaller than many that Anderson describes, it is nonetheless instructive to extend Smithian thought to contemporary economies that have proportionately fewer butchers, brewers, and bakers than did economies in Smith’s era. Many workers today might have a higher degree of freedom than, say, many pin-makers in Smith’s day, who engaged in painfully dull and repetitive work. Nevertheless, as we have seen, the basic psychological machinery that Smith describes still applies, and to worrisome effect.

17 This will usually depend on, inter alia, organizational structure and management style (see, e.g., Mintzberg 2011).