# Philosophy of Management

Although superiors give most inferiors a routine to follow, there is no rule of law. Orders may be arbitrary and can change any time, without prior notice or opportunity to appeal. Superiors are unaccountable to those they order around. They are neither elected nor removable by their inferiors. Inferiors have no right to complain in court about how they are being treated, except in a few narrowly defined cases. So, superiors within a firm have a form of political authority over inferiors (Anderson 2017; see also Blanc 2014; McMahon 2013), which can be exercised for good or ill. From this plausible claim a natural next step is to think that when employees’ securement of goods such as income and status depends critically on compliance with superiors’ good (or ill) will, employees might develop an “adaptive preference” (Nussbaum 2001) to remain in such an unbalanced relationship. The particularly insidious aspect of this development is that it could be workers themselves who become complicit in it.

Workers could form a false consciousness in which they understand themselves as subordinate to their superiors, and thus the choices they make and the preferences they form and act on become choices they freely make—and are understood by the workers themselves as free choices—though they are, in fact, informed and constrained by the environments in which they spend so much time. Thus, workers may accept subservient terms of employment and inferior, obedient positions to their supervisors voluntarily, not because these choices are in their own best interests all-things-considered, but because they seem to them to be the best or appropriate choices available from within their artificially constrained option set. Applying Smithian psychology to the problem of workplace domination that exercises Anderson, we see that such workers might not even realize that they are choosing within artificially imposed constraints or even be aware of just how constrained the options are among which they are choosing. If the constraints have been in place long enough, they may be so ingrained and so internalized that workers might have difficulty crediting a person who correctly points out good alternative options outside their “Overton window” of acceptable, “proper,” or even possible options.

To be sure, the “false consciousness” that workers develop might presuppose a “true self,” which Smith manifestly did not (for him the self owes principally to socialization); yet a Smithian can also recognize here a process involving a potential malformation or distortion of consciousness.

A dominance dynamic in business might also reinforce negative leadership traits in business leaders. Several studies have found traits of psychopathy among corporative executives and some other professionals, indicating a prevalence of psychopathy among them as much as three times as high as in the general population (Babiak and Hare 2006). Although it remains unclear whether business culture and leadership are cause, consequence, or neither of such psychopathic tendencies (Pech and Slade 2007; Boddy et al. 2010; Chiaburu et al. 2013), nevertheless if Anderson is right that the profiles of many business cultures and leaders are troublingly marked by domination and obedience, then their effects could redound not only on workers but on executives as well. Business executives might even be rewarded, financially and professionally, for exhibiting domineering personality traits, thereby creating a feedback loop that encourages such traits, and further solidifying a culture of domination among executives and subservience among workers (Boddy 2006, 2014). Thus, bosses get rewarded for dominating, and workers get rewarded for obeying. And the longer such a dynamic is in place, the more deeply will ingrained behaviors of

16 We use the term broadly here. See Mackinac Center n.d. See also Otteson 2019b.