returned to the site to measure the remaining Aroclor and discovered that at 6 inches below the surface there were 2820 ppm, and at 6” to 16” inches 510 ppm and at 16” to 26” there were 26 ppm still present. To Monsanto the conclusion was clear: “This data would indicate that after 30 years the Aroclor has not migrated to any significant degree.” Although not commented on, the data also indicated that the Aroclor 1242 did not degrade [141].

In his monthly report on environmental problems, W. B. Papageorge began by emphasizing the fear of law suits as a motivation for the company’s actions in removing PCBs from some of their markets: he emphasized “to all remaining users of PCBs the importance of preventing escape to the environment.” He pointed out to Monsanto officials that “we must ensure that these warnings are fully documented so that they will support the action we have taken in this area should we become involved in legal actions.” The company continued its efforts to find substitutes for PCBs in certain products but ran into difficulties with N.C.R. copy paper and industrial/hydraulic fluids. He also reported that “the withdrawal of Aroclor plasticizers from the market appears to have been completed with very few loose ends” and, remarkably, “our distributors are well on their way to zero inventories of the Aroclors, having pretty well matched their purchases from Monsanto with firm orders with their customers.” He was pleased that “it does not appear that there will be any extensive returning of unsold materials.” He also reported that the public relations efforts appeared to be bearing fruit as their July news release “stating our position to withdraw from certain PCB markets, was used in whole or in part by 13 more major newspapers….” [142]. Papageorge was referring to their August 1970 decision to stop selling PCBs as plasticizers [143].

In regard to Monsanto’s efforts to inform their customers of the environmental problems associated with PCBs and their plans to build an incinerator to dispose of the material, Randall Graham, Monsanto’s Senior Fluids Specialist wrote customers, “No longer can we dump scrap Aroclor or spent transformer [?] down the sewer. Indiscriminate dumping of such material can lead to serious repercussions for the electrical industry. For this reason Monsanto is building an incinerator which will be ready some time during the first part of 1971” [144].

Meanwhile, Monsanto continued to produce PCBs and to try to find new markets for its product. In October 1970, Monsanto, faced by the prospect of losing some of the US market, considered approaching the Indian government about “the desirability of the manufacture of [PCBs] in India.” The company considered the “great potential of India” where it “identified …areas where it [could] bring its technology to participate in and foster the economic growth of the country.” Specifically Monsanto identified “India’s fourth 5-year plan” as providing “for significant growth of electric power generation and use which in turn presages a growing demand for products with the dielectric properties of PCBs” [145]. Monsanto also sought to maintain its reputation by counteracting occasional news stories that appeared in the local and national press. In one such incident, reported E.V. John of Monsanto’s world headquarters, “The Anniston Star, Anniston Ala., somehow obtained figures from the FDA which showed unusually high levels of PCB in fish samples taken from Choccoloco Creek. A Star reporter,” he noted, “contacted the Anniston plant.