G. Markowitz, D. Rosner

Monsanto’s Medical Director, Dr. Emmet Kelly, “summarized” the company’s views regarding the toxicity of Aroclor in the mid-1950s. “We know Aroclors are toxic but the actual limit has not been precisely defined.” He explained that the market for Aroclors was growing, particularly in consumer products, and that both workers and consumers who developed liver disease might have a history of Aroclor exposure. Legal liability therefore was a threat because, in his view, “juries would not pay a great deal of attention to MACs [Maximum Allowable Concentrations].” It was with consumer liability in mind that Monsanto “review[ed] every new Aroclor use…. If it is an industrial application where we can get air concentrations and have some reasonable expectation that the air concentrations will stay the same, we are much more liberal in the use of Aroclor.” But in consumer products, the problem became much more complex:

If, however, it is distributed to householders where it can be used in almost any shape and form and we are never able to know how much of the concentration they are exposed to, we are much more strict. No amount of toxicity testing will obviate this last dilemma and therefore I do not believe any more testing would be justified [48].

Consumer exposures presented a major challenge for a company used to thinking in terms of industrial toxicology.

The dangers of PCBs and potential liability affected even the management of specific plants. In November 1955, the Medical Department at the Aroclors Department in the Krummrich plant in St. Louis, recommended that “the eating of lunches should not be allowed in this department” because “Aroclor vapors and other process vapors could contaminate the lunches unless they were properly protected.” It therefore left the possibility that “where a workman claimed physical harm from any contaminated food, it would be extremely difficult on the basis of past literature to counter such claims” because such literature “claimed that chlorinated biphenyls were quite toxic materials by ingestion and inhalation” [49].

In 1955, Monsanto contracted with the Kettering Laboratories to conduct studies of short and medium term effects of Aroclors on rabbits, mice, rats, guinea pigs, and a cat. In the private report to Monsanto, the lead researcher, J.F. Treon, identified a mouse that developed a “malignant lymphoma that involved the liver, spleen, kidneys and heart, and therefore its death was attributed to natural causes” [50]. The next year (1956), Treon published his report in the American Industrial Hygiene Association Journal but omitted any mention of the cancerous mouse [51]. Further, neither Treon nor Monsanto conducted long-term chronic toxicity studies at that time.

In 1956, Monsanto tried to interest the Navy in using one of their products Pydraul 150, as a material for elevating the antennas in submarines. The Navy was worried about the use of PCBs in its atomic submarines which could “remain submerged for periods of up to 6 weeks” which meant that “any possible toxicological effects [could not] be tolerated.” Monsanto worried that Pydraul 150 which contained 25% of Aroclor 1240 would face “demise … in the antenna retracting mechanisms of submarines unless we can present a convincing story as to its safety of use” [52].