to provide information to both the public and the government about the dangers of Aroclors specifically and PCBs in general. It was at this time that Elmer Wheeler learned of a conversation between Dave Nelson of Monsanto’s Research Center and Bob Day in the Cincinnati Laboratories of the National Air Pollution Control Administration. Day had called Nelson asking “for any information Monsanto might have relating to what might happen to chlorinated biphenyls in products that might be incinerated.” Nelson was immediately taken with Day for he felt that this public employee “was not a ‘Knight on a White Horse’ but was reasonable and objective.” Soon, Nelson found out an aspect of Day’s past that explained part of the reason he was “reasonable and objective.” Nelson told Wheeler that “Day finally told me that he is a Monsanto employee from Pensacola fulfilling his military commitment as a member of the Commission Corps. in the Public Health Service.” Nelson was pleased with the conversation and told Wheeler that Day would “send word back to Washington which will then be related to the members of Congress that the PCBs are not used in some of the applications which have been indicated in the public press and in general try to present Monsanto’s views to wit: ‘We cannot conceive how the PCBs can be getting into the environment in a widespread fashion and that the company is actively involved in research programs to try to shed some light on the situation’.” [104] This spin on the information provided to the government was in spite of years of information about the environmental effects of PCBs during which the mechanisms by which PCBs entered the environment were being described in detail to Monsanto itself [105].

# “Sell the hell out of them as long as we can”: 1969

While they publically questioned Jensen, Widmark, and Risebrough’s identification of widespread contamination by PCBs, in private company officials acknowledged the huge problem they faced. By August 1969, the concerns about PCBs had become so severe that Monsanto set up a Task Force that became the “Aroclor ‘Ad Hoc’ Committee.” At its first meeting, the PCB Task Force reviewed the growing evidence that PCBs were in a wide range of products in different states and in previously unidentified locales. The Georgia and West Virginia health departments had found it in milk; Japan had found Aroclor 1248 in bran; Therminol was being used for heat transfer fluids; it was in detergent; a government lab found PCBs in soap; it was in Electrosol dishwasher liquids; over 10% of samples identified PCBs in Lake Michigan; it was in mud samples in Pensacola, Florida; and, of course, in San Francisco Bay. The notes from the meeting indicated that the “subject is snowballing.” In hand-written notes, a Task Force member summarized the sense of the meeting: “where do we go from here” and listed the “alternatives” as “(1) Go out of business. (2) sell the hell out of them as long as we can and do nothing else” and “(3) try to stay in business in controlled applications—control contamination levels” [106].

The Aroclor Ad Hoc Committee’s meeting on September 5, 1969 was chaired by E. P. Wheeler, at the time Monsanto’s Manager of Environmental Health. The other members of the committee were W.R. Richard, manager of Research and Development of the Organics Division, E. V. John, Director of Public Relations, P.