food—do not constitute a serious threat to public health.” Studies with fish, how -

ever, presented problems for the company. Fish “can concentrate/accumulate per -

sistent chlorinated hydrocarbons in their tissue. For example, trout raised in water

containing 1 part per billion will contain 1 part per million in their tissues in

6 weeks.” This buildup presented potential problems where fish consumption was

high. “In Sweden and other Scandinavian countries, where fish make up a large

portion of the daily diet, the use of DDT has been temporarily or permanently

banned,” the committee noted. Similarly, several states have taken action to ban

the sale of fish and “bills have been presented in Congress to outlaw the sale

and use of DDT.” The committee noted that just in the previous summer, “the

U.S. Food and Drug Administration seized and destroyed Cohoe Salmon caught

in Lake Michigan” [110].

The committee also worried about a second consequence, the “alleged effect

on species of coastal and other fish-eating birds.” These data were “interpreted

by a number of scientists (and seized upon by the conservationists-pseudo-sci-

entists)” as evidence that certain “birds face elimination or absolute extinction

because of persistent chlorinated hydrocarbons in fish which make up the major

portion if not all of their diet.” One troubling aspect of this problem was that

bald eagles were identified as a bird at risk by the US Department of the Interior.

“Now the emblem of the heritage of the United States is threatened!” The grow

ing body of evidence that indicated that birds, fish and even shrimp were accumu-

lating or being threatened by PCBs presented serious problems for the industry

and particularly tended to undermine their hope that a threshold level could be

found below which PCBs were not harmful [110]. (Emphasis [on extinction] is in

the original.)

The committee acknowledged the difficulty of preventing environmental pol-

lution even at Monsanto’s own plants. They noted that in one plant “up to three

gallons per day was being lost to the river from the use of Pydraul AC in air

compressors.” Despite all the ambiguity in the data that indicated that there might

not be a well-defined threshold limit, the committee suggested that “PCBs are

‘moderately’ toxic to man” but that “a probably safe level for Aroclor 1254 and

1260 in the diet will be something less than one part per million.” The commit-

tee also argued that while adult birds or fish were not grossly affected, “the ‘safe

long term’ or ‘chronic dose’ is less than 100 ppm insofar as reproduction is con-

cerned.” It also argued that shrimp were “safe” when exposed to Aroclor 1254

at levels “less than five parts per billion.” They took solace from the conclusion

that “we may be able to show some kind of reasonable numbers for ‘safe levels’

of Aroclor 1254 and 1260 (and other chlorinated biphenyls) in some species” but

worried that “there are other species of life in the ecosystem where a zero to 5

parts per billion limit for Aroclor 1254 and 1260 … will be the tolerance level”

[111]. [Emphasis is in the original.]

The committee remarked on the changing political context and specifically the

influence of the growing environmental movement on their image and ultimately,

the market for their products. As of that moment, in late 1969, “there are no

restrictions which control the current uses of our Aroclors or PCBs.” They were