Frone et al.

is using or impaired by alcohol or other drugs at work (Trice & Sonnenstuhl, 1988). Job visibility increases with low mobility during work hours, high task interdependence, and direct contact with coworkers or organizational outsiders (e.g., customers, clients, patients, and the general public). The limited direct research on informal social control shows that performing one’s job in public, working closely with others, and low job mobility are associated with reduced substance misuse during the workday and away from work (Frone, 2003; Macdonald, Wells, & Wild, 1999).

Finally, a work‑related mechanism exists within unionized workplaces that has the potential to leverage informal social control to help individuals with SUDs develop the motivation to begin the process of treatment and recovery. This mechanism represents member assistance programs (MAPs). MAPs are voluntary, peer‑based programs that help motivate union members to seek help for SUDs and other personal problems, as well as provide support and assistance to those seeking help and those in recovery (Bacharach et al., 1996, p. 261). Peer‑based counselors are union members who voluntarily assist coworkers in solving personal problems during their regular workday. They may confront coworkers to help them accept that they have a problem and need help, provide referrals for treatment, and often informally monitor a person’s progress through treatment, and offer post‑treatment support to help ensure a successful recovery (Bacharach et al., 2001).

Although union members with SUDs may directly approach peer counselors for help, most will not initiate this interaction due to high levels of denial associated with SUDs (Bacharach et al., 2001). Therefore, in terms of informal social control, peer counselors may approach an individual after receiving information from coworkers about performance problems. For example, the peer counselor may approach the individual and relay that their coworkers were concerned about their well‑being after noticing some performance issues. The peer counselor can offer information and treatment referrals for any problem affecting the individual’s performance. Being approached this way makes the individual aware that their substance use may be noticeable to coworkers. Although peer counselors do not have disciplinary power, armed with reliable evidence of chronic performance problems, they may exert informal leverage over an individual by expressing concern for the individual’s well‑being, describing the impact of their behavior on coworkers, and informing the individual that if they do not work with the MAP to address the source of their performance problems, the union might not be able to save the individual’s job if management gets involved (Bacharach et al., 2001).

Although there is a paucity of systematic, quantitative research on the role of workplace social control mechanisms in the SUD recovery process, the above research suggests that workplace social control may play a supportive role in motivating employees with substance use problems to seek treatment and helping those in recovery to maintain abstinence. Formal and informal workplace social control also may increase bonding with the work organization (i.e., increased commitment to coworkers and the organization) and levels of task and contextual performance, thereby supporting the development of human, social, and personal capital (see Table 3) that is critical to the initiation and sustainability of SUD recovery.

Occup Health Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 May 18.