Frone et al.

characterize nonabstinence outcome goals (Rosenberg, Grant, & Davis, 2020). No matter the specific term used, they have three common elements: (a) limiting the amount consumed of the target substance, the frequency of consumption, and/ or the speed of consumption; (b) experiencing fewer if any harmful consequences of consumption; and (c) developing a sense of consumption‑related self‑efficacy (i.e., realistic confidence in using self‑control behaviors to moderate use) (Rosenberg et al., 2020). Although abstinence is the most widely accepted and most beneficial goal for many individuals with SUDs, nonabstinence goals may be helpful when considered part of a broader harm‑reduction strategy to motivate recovery efforts. Nonabstinence outcomes are beginning to be incorporated into randomized clinical trials of behavioral and pharmaceutical treatments and in the treatment guidelines of various countries and organizations for alcohol use disorders (e.g., World Health Organization) (Mann, Aubin, & Witkiewitz, 2017). However, these approaches may be safer and more practical when referring to alcohol use. The unpredictability of the illicit drug market due to adulteration and increasing potency (and therefore potential lethality) makes this approach challenging. Illicit drugs increasingly contain powerful synthetic opioids, such as fentanyl, or other harmful substances, alone or in uncharacterized mixtures. Synthetic opioids such as fentanyl were involved in an estimated 62% of drug overdoses in the 12 months ending in December 2020, based on provisional data (Ahmad et al., 2021). Given inherent and unpredictable risks in these scenarios, additional research into the utility of nonabstinence outcomes for substances other than alcohol is critical.

The second point of discussion relates to using medication‑assisted therapy (MAT) during recovery. MAT represents the combination of approved medication (e.g., disulfiram or acamprosate for alcohol use disorders, methadone or buprenorphine for opioid use disorders, and naltrexone for both alcohol and opioid disorders) and psychosocial treatment, including peer support group participation (National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 2019; Office of the Surgeon General, 2016). Research shows that MAT may improve treatment outcomes by reducing cravings for and the euphoria experienced from a misused psychoactive substance (Connery, 2015; National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 2019; Office of the Surgeon General, 2016). However, despite MAT’s effectiveness, the recovery literature points out that individuals using MAT may experience stigma from some therapists and peer support groups (e.g., Alcoholics Anonymous, Narcotics Anonymous) because they are not considered to be abstinent and in recovery (Krawczyk et al., 2018; Office of the Surgeon General, 2016; Robinson & Adinoff, 2018; White, 2007a, 2011). These circumstances have resulted in peer support groups that allow full participation for individuals using MAT, such as Methadone Anonymous and Medication‑Assisted Recovery Anonymous.

# Recovery Theme 2: Recovery is a Lived, Self-Directed, and Empowering Process that Involves Building Healthy, Productive, and Meaningful Lives

The recovery literature suggests that SUD recovery represents more than a complete or progressive move away from substance use and reduced associated harms. Importantly, it involves the accrual of positive benefits obtained by developing or rebuilding a healthy, productive, and meaningful life (Ashford et al., 2019; Betty Ford Institute Consensus Panel, 2007; Office of the Surgeon General, 2016; UK Drug Policy Commission, 2008; White,

Occup Health Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 May 18.