Frone et al.

Author Manuscript

the SUD recovery process. We then use this model and relevant research from the substance use and occupational health literatures to develop a series of general research propositions. These propositions highlight broad directions requiring more detailed conceptualization and empirical research to understand better how the work environment may impact SUD recovery efforts.

# Conceptual Model of Workplace Supported Recovery

At the center of the model in Fig. 1 is a general depiction of the recovery process. The first indirect path from a SUD to recovery through treatment represents assisted recovery. Specifically, having a SUD motivates entry into treatment, representing any combination of formal treatment with or without medication assistance and formal peer support networks (e.g., alcoholics anonymous, narcotics anonymous). Treatment then increases the likelihood of abstinence, which increases the possibility of reduced clinical symptoms and broader recovery efforts and outcomes. The second indirect path from a SUD to recovery represents unassisted or natural recovery. In this path, having a SUD leads to unassisted abstinence, which increases the likelihood of reduced clinical symptoms and broader recovery efforts and outcomes. Finally, there is a feedback path indicating that if recovery efforts are interrupted, a recurrence of the SUD may occur, thereby beginning a new cycle.

The model also shows where work conditions might impact the SUD recovery process. Although the work environment may play a role in the development or perpetuation of substance misuse and SUDs, depicted by the two broken lines in Fig. 1, we do not focus on those associations. The reader can consult recent reviews of the employee substance use literature for more information (Ames & Moore, 2016; Frone, 2013, 2019). Nonetheless, this research can inform us about potential workplace effects on the recovery process after a SUD develops and is discussed later in this context. The solid lines emanating from the workplace recovery hazards and supports boxes indicate that aspects of the work environment can decrease or increase the likelihood of (a) initiating and completing treatment and maintaining involvement in peer-support groups, (b) achieving and sustaining abstinence, and (c) maintaining involvement in long-term care, if required, rebuilding parts of one’s life damaged by a SUD, and developing and sustaining improvements in physical, mental, and social well-being that is the essence of recovery. Given the lack of systematic research on the association between the workplace and SUDs recovery, we do not know which workplace hazards and supports will have the greatest impact on the SUD recovery process. Below, we will explore some potential candidate workplace hazards and supports.

Finally, as evident in the discussion below, no overarching theory exists to explain how the workplace relates to the SUD recovery process. The associations of the various workplace hazards and supports to the dimensions of the SUD recovery process are couched in different theoretical perspectives. For example, the association of negative work conditions to dimensions of the SUD recovery process may be understood within the context of instrumentalization theory. In contrast, the association of workplace substance use norms to the SUD recovery process may be understood within the context of ritual theory. The various theories that help us to understand and design studies to test these individual associations are referred to as unit theories (Cronin et al., 2021). In contrast, a programmatic theory

Occup Health Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 May 18.