Frone et al.

Author Manuscript

employment and employers can play in individuals’ recovery efforts, there are efforts at the national and state level and among recovery organizations to promote workplace supported recovery (https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/opioids/wsrp/resources.html). However, few attempts have been made to define workplace supported recovery.

These efforts to promote workplace supported recovery have primarily focused on the resources provided by employment that can support recovery efforts. This focus is understandable because employment can provide critical manifest (e.g., income, paid time off, health benefits, and retirement benefits) and latent (e.g., time structure and regular activity, social contacts, purpose and meaning, development of skills, goal achievement, and status and identity) resources (Jahoda, 1981, 1982). Nonetheless, it is also essential to consider that employment exposes employees to workplace hazards associated with substance misuse and SUDs, such as work stressors, substance availability, and prescriptive workplace substance use norms (Ames & Moore, 2016; Frone, 2013, 2019). In addition to contributing to or perpetuating SUDs, these workplace hazards may also undermine the initiation and sustainability of SUD recovery efforts. Therefore, any definition or discussion of workplace supported recovery may benefit from considering both the employment‑related hazards and supports that can affect SUD recovery.

Given the minimal research exploring the components of workplace supported recovery, we propose the following working definition of workplace supported recovery from SUDs:

An integrated set of evidence‑based interventions and policies that (a) reduce workplace hazards promoting the development or perpetuation of substance use disorders and undermining recovery from substance use disorders; (b) increase workplace supports preventing the development or perpetuation of substance use disorders and facilitating recovery from substance use disorders; (c) help employees maintain or regain employment during recovery; and (d) promote overall growth and well‑being among employees, work organizations, families, and communities.

This definition highlights several broad assumptions underlying workplace supported recovery. The first assumption is that workplace efforts to address SUDs and recovery require efforts on several fronts. Workplaces may consider reducing hazards and providing support in an integrated effort to address SUDs, support unassisted and assisted treatment and recovery efforts, and promote overall well‑being among employees. This approach is consistent with a critical recovery theme that SUD recovery reflects more than sustained abstinence resulting from workplace hazard reduction. It also involves the accrual of positive benefits obtained by developing or rebuilding a healthy, productive, and meaningful life resulting from workplace support and health promotion. The reduction of workplace hazards and strengthening of workplace supports promoting recovery efforts and well‑being are aligned with the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) Total Worker Health® (TWH) approach. This approach calls for policies and practices that integrate the reduction of workplace hazards with the promotion of workplace supports to improve workers’ overall well‑being (Schill et al., 2019).

Occup Health Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 May 18.