Frone et al.

of needs were low‑level physiological needs (eating, drinking to avoid thirst, sleeping), middle‑level safety/belonging needs (feeling safe, predictability, getting affection from others, feeling like one belongs), and higher‑order psychological needs (self‑esteem and self‑actualization—feeling respected, achieving personal and professional goals, living with meaning and purpose in life, realizing one’s potential in life). The results showed that high‑level psychological needs were rated less important for drug addicts and chimpanzees than for the remaining six targets. In addition, the importance of low‑level physiological needs and middle‑level safety and belonging needs were rated lowest for drug addicts compared with all other targets, including chimpanzees. Schroeder & Epley (2020) speculated that all needs, including low‑level physiological needs required for survival, were rated as less important for drug addicts because they are “presumed to find only one need important—likely satisfying their drug addiction—at the expense of all other psychological and physical needs” (p. 5).

Evidence suggests that such broadly dehumanizing perceptions of individuals with severe SUDs are not borne out. Like people without SUDs, most individuals with SUDs have aspirations for healthy, happy, secure, and productive lives (Brady, 2012; Thom, 2010). Indeed, such aspirations underlie the voluntary and self‑directed nature of successful recovery efforts (see Recovery Theme 2). Schroeder and Epley’s (2020) findings are noteworthy because they underscore the level of stigmatization and misunderstanding directed at individuals with severe SUDs that increases the difficulty of overcoming their addiction and fulfilling their dreams and aspirations.

In the workplace, the stigma associated with an active SUD can profoundly impact employees, as evidenced by difficulty obtaining or maintaining employment, holding low quality and precarious employment, low income, constraints that undermine job performance and promotion opportunities, social exclusion, and an inability to obtain employer accommodations (Hakulinen et al., 2019; Krupa et al., 2009; National Academies of Sciences‑Engineering‑Medicine, 2016a; Nieweglowski et al., 2018; Roche et al., 2019; Stuart, 2004). Several studies provide evidence of SUD stigma in the workplace. The National Safety Council surveyed organizational decision‑makers in U.S. organizations with 50 or more employees in 2017 and 2019 (National Safety Council, 2017, 2019). In the 2017 NSC survey, employers reported their general perceptions of prescription drug misuse. Consistent with contemporary views of SUDs, the majority of employers agreed with statements supportive of treatment and recovery and less stigma—misuse of prescription drugs represents “a sign of addiction” (80%) and “a disease that should be treated like any other chronic disease” (71%). Nonetheless, a substantial proportion of employers agreed with statements characterizing stigma that may undermine treatment and recovery—the misuse of prescription drugs represents “a justifiable reason to fire an employee” (65%), “a signal that an employee cannot be trusted” (43%), and a “moral/ethical failing” (42%).

In the 2019 NSC survey, employers reported the approach that best reflects how their organization would handle an employee misusing any of nine drugs. The nine drugs fall into three categories—alcohol, legally obtained prescription drugs (opioids, stimulants, benzodiazepines), and drugs illegal at the federal level (state‑legal marijuana, illicit marijuana, illicitly obtained prescription opioids, heroin/fentanyl, other illicit drugs). Less

Occup Health Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 May 18.