Frone et al.

Author Manuscript

The second assumption underlying this definition is that the benefits of workplace supported recovery efforts accrue to more than the affected employees. Coworkers, employers, families, and the communities where employees with SUDs live also may benefit. Moreover, for workplaces and organizations, reducing workplace hazards and promoting workplace supports affecting well-being may produce workplace benefits beyond reducing SUDs. These actions may affect all workers in ways that improve job satisfaction, employee attendance and engagement, job performance, worker safety, organizational commitment, and employee retention.

A final assumption to this definition is also critical. Workplace supported recovery programs and approaches may not look the same in every organization or every occupation or industry. Supporting workers in treatment and/or in recovery from a SUD may require customized strategies, especially for those performing hazardous or safety-sensitive work. Qualified occupational healthcare providers can help to evaluate job roles with appropriate consideration given to any health challenges faced by the worker occupying the role. They can then make case-by-case determinations about specific and necessary restrictions or job limits. Reasonable accommodations should be considered and implemented by the employer when possible. Additionally, given the lack of recovery research on nonabstinence approaches, especially for SUDs involving illicit drug use, workplace supported recovery is generally characterized as abstinence for this paper. This may be especially critical when applied to workers performing hazardous work or in those who have safety-sensitive job duties and responsibilities.

# Is Substance Use Disorder Recovery Associated with Positive Employment Outcomes?

As noted earlier and shown in Table 1, most adults in the U.S. with alcohol or illicit drug use disorders are employed, and a relatively small proportion, yet substantial number of individuals in the workforce report a current SUD or that they are in recovery or have recovered from a substance use problem. So, do individuals in treatment and recovery report better work-related outcomes? Although little research has explored this question, there is evidence that SUD treatment and recovery may be associated with positive work outcomes.

For example, Slaymaker & Owen (2006) found that among employed individuals admitted to residential treatment, 65% reported continuous abstinence at six months, 51% were continuously abstinent at 12 months posttreatment, and most individuals regularly attended Alcoholics Anonymous meetings. At 12 months posttreatment, 65% of individuals continued to work for the same employer. In addition, the percentage of individuals reporting unplanned absences decreased from 78% before treatment to 30% at the 12-month follow-up. Further, substantial reductions from pretreatment to 12-month follow-up were reported in the number of problem days at work in the past month (5.20 days vs. 0.14 days), and the proportion of individuals disciplined at work (22.2% vs. 6.5%), reporting their job was in jeopardy (18.2% vs. 5.2%), and losing their job during the preceding 12 months (men only, 24% vs. 7%). Similarly, among employed individuals admitted to inpatient treatment, Arbour et al., (2014) found that there were substantial reductions from pretreatment to

Occup Health Sci. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2023 May 18.