# International Journal for Educational and Vocational Guidance

Portuguese version may rephrase item 12 using another expression to attenuate the ambiguity of the current form.

Pearson correlations and regression models partially corroborated our hypotheses. The first hypothesis stated that career exploration and decision-making self-efficacy would predict all MME’s dimensions. Despite the findings suggesting career decision-making self-efficacy predicted all factors, career exploration self-efficacy predicted only two dimensions (i.e., human capital and professional development, and social capital and networking) in the regression models. This means that after controlling for the effect of other independent variables, career exploration self-efficacy lost the predictive effect on career identity and self-management, and environmental monitoring. The findings indicate individuals who perceive themselves as able to successfully make career decisions are more likely to be employable. These findings are in line with recent results that acknowledges self-efficacy as a predictor of employability (Taveira et al., 2017) or a mediator of employability and other career variables (e.g., perceived social support, career development learning, work experience; Wujema et al., 2022).

The results also indicate that individuals who perceive themselves as able to successfully explore career paths are more likely to have employability resources related to human capital and professional development, and social capital and networking, but not necessarily to career identity and self-management or environmental controlling. These unexpected results might be related to the characteristics of the sample. In terms of identity and personal management, it is known that over the life cycle, career identity and career plans themselves tend to crystallize (Super, 1990). The results seem to indicate that in this sample, consisting mostly of people over 40 years old, exploration behaviors are inhibited by this crystallization. Regarding environmental control, it is known that in unemployed persons, the expectancy of success predicts exploration intentions (Taveira et al., 2017). Since the beliefs that the current labor market is precarious and demanding are common among jobless people (Drosos et al., 2021), it is possible that these adults are less motivated to explore the environment and consequently have fewer resources to control the environment.

The second hypothesis stated life project’s identification and involvement would predict career identity and self-management. Despite the findings suggesting moderate correlations to the other MME dimensions, only career identity and self-management were predicted by life projects (specifically, by identification) after controlling for the effect of other variables. The findings suggest that individuals who are aware of their intended futures are more likely to be conscious of their career identity. This is consistent with the existing literature suggesting that career is an important life domain often retrieved by people narrating their prospective life stories (Zhu & Tse, 2016). As for life project’s involvement, the unexpected results might be related to high collinearity between the two LPS factors.

The third hypothesis stated that future time orientation would predict environmental monitoring, with two future time orientation dimensions being assessed (i.e., impact and distance). Despite the moderate correlations between impact and all MME scores, only environmental control, and social capital and networking were predicted by impact after controlling for the effect of other.