# Chatbot breakthrough in the 2020s? An ethical reflection on the trend of automated consultations…

gauges ‘reasonable degrees of belief in propositions quite devoid of statistical background’ (p. 12). Epistemic probability concerns our possession of knowledge, or information, meaning how much support is given by all the available evidence.

When physicians observe a patient presenting with specific signs and symptoms, they assess the subjective probability of the diagnosis. Such probabilities have been called diagnostic probabilities (Wulff et al. 1986), a form of epistemic probability. In practice, however, clinicians make diagnoses in a more complex manner, which they are rarely able to analyse logically (Banerjee et al. 2009). Encountering the unexpected is an occupational hazard in clinical practice. Unlike artificial systems, experienced doctors recognise the fact that diagnoses and prognoses are always marked by varying degrees of uncertainty. They are aware that some diagnoses may turn out to be wrong or that some of their treatments may not lead to the cures expected. Thus, medical diagnosis and decision-making require ‘prudence’, that is, ‘a mode of reasoning about contingent matters in order to select the best course of action’ (Hariman 2003, p. 5).

Prudence or prudentia is Cicero’s Latin translation of the Greek phronesis, which is Aristotle’s (1926) formulation of practical wisdom in the Nicomachean Ethics (Hariman 2003, p. iv). According to Heinrichs (2007), Aristotle defined phronesis as the skill of dealing with probability, combining the ability to predict based on evidence and the ability to make decisions that produce the greatest probability of happiness. Phronesis, prudence or practical wisdom refers to the flexible, interpretive capacity that enables the physician to determine the best course of action when knowledge depends on circumstance (Montgomery 2006).

Following Heinrichs’ (2007, p. 289) account of phronesis, we emphasise three constituent elements in medical decision-making: (1) showing off experience and knowledge, (2) bending the rules (i.e. adjusting to changing circumstances rather than following strict rules) and (3) taking the middle course (conciliatory view between contradictions and conflicts). Therefore, decision-making is a carefully articulated mode of reasoning, with its own specific standards, procedures and problems. Experienced doctors, as prudential actors, are capable of working in a challenging triad of messy practice, ethical standards and context-sensitive scientific knowledge. As Powell (2019, p. 2) put it, ‘what doctors often need is wisdom rather than intelligence, and we are a long way away from a science of artificial wisdom’.

Since the 1950s, there have been efforts aimed at building models and systematising physician decision-making. For example, in the field of psychology, the so-called framework of ‘script theory’ was ‘used to explain how a physician’s medical diagnostic knowledge is structured for diagnostic problem solving’ (Fischer and Lam 2016, p. 24). According to this theory, ‘the medical expert has’