which could lead to cognitive deterioration (Hassandarvish, 2020; Shanmugam et al., 2020). The public cannot foresee how the pandemic would pan out or how the government would formulate or change policies from time to time to deal with the current perilous situations. The employers are concerned that the country can come under the MCO anytime, sometimes quite abruptly, when the number of confirmed positive cases increases. Reintroducing the MCO could lead to the closing of specific businesses or industries, whereas the employers need to continue to bear the fixed costs of the business operations such as rent or workers’ salary, even though there is reduced revenue or none at all. The employees are worried about the future of the companies they work for and wonder if they would lose their jobs. All these concerns could generate lots of fears in the people’s minds and even cause panic attacks, especially when the pandemic appears to be out of control. Besides, social distancing could disrupt the people’s social rhythm and work routines; loneliness as well as feeling of hopelessness and worthlessness could easily set in, and in extreme cases, might lead to suicide attempts (Gunnell et al., 2020; Holmes et al., 2020). It is a difficult and poignant situation when people are away from families, facing the uncertainty of their jobs or financial sources, and have no one to talk to. Holt-Lunstad et al. (2015) reported that the mortality rate for those suffering from severe social isolation could be as high as 29%. Social distancing and wearing face masks stop people from getting close to each other, depriving them of lots of friendly gestures such as shaking hands or seeing the smiley faces. Some people might be isolated during the pandemic and they have nobody to share their feelings with, and on top of that, people around them cannot observe their feelings because of the face masks; this is very dangerous and the possibility of suicide cannot be ruled out (Hwang et al., 2020).

For the person under investigation (PUI), the person under surveillance (PUS), and patients tested positive for COVID-19, the isolation could induce negative psychological emotions within them. Murugappan (2020) highlighted that these groups of people could experience post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). In Malaysia, one PUS who was confined to a quarantine center had vandalized the room, and another PUI committed suicide (Chua, 2020; Zolkepli, 2020). The swab test, the fear of being tested positive for COVID-19, and social stigma heighten the anxiety level among the PUS. Patients who recovered from COVID-19 live under tremendous stress, worrying about the risk of re-infection as some recovered patients had tested positive again during the follow-up health checks (Vanar, 2020). Self-quarantine and social distancing have a more significant impact on specific groups of people who are emotionally vulnerable, for example, those with a borderline personality disorder or psychiatric disorders (Chong, 2020; Gunnell et al., 2020). The hospital staff members and frontline workers are busy copping the pandemic, and these particular groups of people cannot get close to others because of the nature of their jobs; besides they receive little attention from the health authority. These working and social conditions do not augur well for the above groups of people; over a prolonged period, negative emotions might slip in such as anxiety, fear, and even depression.

By exposing to long-term stressors and job demands, the front-liners may experience burnout, develop psychological fatigue, and eventually exhibit poor work performance. In a recent study, Malaysia’s frontline workers were apart from their families for months (Nienhaus & Hod, 2020). Most of them felt stressed and depressed as the public saw them as “infected persons” due to their working environment. Frontline workers are required to work extra hours to cope with the massive number of infected patients. Most of them are tired of overwork, under job pressure, and scared of facing patients with the deadly virus. All these factors can stimulate mental stress and cause insomnia, which will adversely affect their work performance. These scenarios are highlighted in Tan (2021b) report indicating that some of the frontline workers have suffered from depression and resorted to relying on antidepressants as the negative emotions become unmanageable.

Woon et al. (2020) pointed out that students’ stress and anxiety levels were elevated after the MCO was lifted; they were fearful of the long-time exposure to the high-risk learning environment. Higher education students who were away from home and had difficulty switching to online learning also experienced a high level of anxiety during the COVID-19 outbreak (Grubic et al., 2020). The online learning has its challenges - unstable Internet connection, limited data capacity, or lack of proper electronic devices (Borneo Post, 2021). Consequences of measures taken by the government, such as social distancing, uncertainty in school commencement, delay in examination, and necessity of online learning, have increased the perceived threats in the people’s minds, which in turn led to mental depression among university students in Malaysia (Sundarasen et al., 2020). The students’ mental health and wellbeing are at stake with the constant fear and anxiety about a bleak future. To elaborate more, Sundarasen et al. (2020) elucidated that more than 30% of university students in Malaysia felt anxious during the pandemic between April and May 2020.

# Job and Domestic Violence

Social capital is a more influential driver of the society’s wellbeing compared with economic wealth in the South Korea context (Lee & Kim, 2018). However, the looming COVID-19 economic havoc has caused socioeconomic distress followed by mass unemployment. Beja (2019) illustrated that the indirect cost of unemployment is twice higher than the direct cost of subjective wellbeing, which leads to a reduction