T. Jakobi et al.: The Role of IS in the Conflicting Interests Regarding GDPR, Bus Inf Syst Eng 62(3):261–272 (2020)

organizational and system capabilities and their design for sustainable implementation of regulatory compliance. On the other hand, it would be interesting to conceptualize different levels of compliance for different contexts. Researchers could investigate whether and how data responsibility and ethical treatment of data translate into competitive advantages and operational excellence.

# 4 Ten Critical Aspects of the European General Data Protection Regulation from the Point of View of Information Systems

Peter Mertens, School of Business, Economics and Society and Faculty of Engineering, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg

1. One critical aspect of the GDPR revolves around the high penalties a violation of this regulation may entail. According to article 83, companies violating the GDPR have to pay a fine of up to 4% of their annual sales. Considering that average profit margins in many economic sectors and industries are about 5%, with relative R&D investments being in a similar range, it becomes obvious that the maximal forfeit of 4% might jeopardize the existence of a firm. This is also why the penalty should be calculated not based on sales but on return on investment (ROI). In Germany, as of yet, the highest penalty amount (14.5 million €) has been imposed on Deutsche Wohnen, a German property firm. It had failed to delete files that were no longer needed. The fines associated with the GDPR have thus led to a strong risk aversion among companies.
2. This risk aversion is further reinforced by legal uncertainty surrounding the GDPR. One reason for this uncertainty relates to the use of vague legal language and terms, such as “legitimate interest,” “under consideration of the special circumstances and general requirements,” and “meaningful survey.” Another reason, especially for companies operating abroad, relates to so-called “escape clauses” that allow for the integration of country-specific laws and regulations in order to protect national privileges (e.g., freedom of the press). In this context, the EU Commission has criticized that some German regulations appear to be overly tight, while others seem to be overly loose, such as those regulating the appointment of data protection officers in small or medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) (Neuerer 2019). Further, in many functional areas (e.g., human resources) and industries (e.g., healthcare), the GDPR conflicts with the growing number of function- and/or industry-specific rules requiring companies to keep very detailed data records. Also, tax specialists are puzzled by the stark contrast between the far-reaching obligations around data safekeeping, on the one hand, and the “right to be forgotten” stipulated in article 17 of the GDPR, on the other hand. For example, in Germany alone, there are 17 data protection authorities that sometimes contradict each other. Moreover, the enactment of new rules entails reciprocal effects or even additional conflicts. As a consequence, the European Court of Justice limited the “right to be forgotten” to the EU, which implies that Internet firms such as Google are not required to delete ‘questionable’ links entirely (Wieduwilt 2019). On the other hand, the same court ruled that a user’s explicit consent is needed, thereby making it harder for companies to use common web-tracking practices (Ritzer 2019).
3. The complexity of the GDPR also has major implications for the theory and practice of law in general (Kremer 2019; Hey 2019). For example, a survey conducted by BITKOM (“Germany’s digital association”) revealed that, one year after the GDPR came into effect, only about 25% of surveyed companies had been able to implement the GDPR rules. Additionally, in a related study, 95% of the interviewees indicated that a full implementation of the GDPR would be impossible (BITKOM e.V. 2019).
4. The goal to avoid unpredictable risks has provoked reactions that not always seem to be rational. For example, the explanatory statement of the GDPR suggests that reverting back from electronic files to paper files would not matter, since the regulation is neutral toward the ‘technology’ used. (More examples can be found in Mertens 2019 and Crocoll 2019.)
5. The GDPR implies a growing burden of fixed costs, mainly resulting from overhead expenses. While large-scale companies can spread these costs across a broad range of related business activities, SMEs often cannot. Thus, the GDPR is another factor promoting market concentration tendencies, which is not desirable in a free-market economy. Moreover, new problems surface in manufacturing units; for instance, errors detected through the collection of data during production may be traced back to flawed customer orders, inaccuracies in production planning and scheduling systems, deficiencies in raw materials and parts purchased from suppliers, logistical problems within the supply chain, as well as mistakes of machine operators. In all these cases, sensitive data may be reviewed by data protection.