T. Jakobi et al.: The Role of IS in the Conflicting Interests Regarding GDPR, Bus Inf Syst Eng 62(3):261–272 (2020) 267

1. The legal uncertainty surrounding the GDPR implies that firms active on the Internet will ask users/customers for increasingly detailed and therefore very comprehensive expressions of consent, written in sophisticated legal jargon. Against this backdrop, it would be naïve to assume that users will read this language thoroughly; quite the contrary, most users are likely to merely “click it away” without paying closer attention, also referred to as “tiredness to agree” in recent literature. This is consistent with the general observation that many citizens perceive the GDPR bureaucracy as rather annoying than helpful (Triumph-Adler 2019).
2. In some industries, the GDPR may actually turn into an “innovation barrier”. One symptom of such a development can be seen in political efforts in the area of public health to follow through with exceptions for the collection of ‘big’ patient data in order to not impede R&D efforts concerning computer-assisted diagnosis through artificial neural networks (“balance between protection of data and health”). Here, the German Secretary of Health argues that data protection is “something for healthy people” (Waschinski 2019; Knodt 2019) and has thus initiated the “digital health law”.
3. The “backstop” strategies along with the additional costs and potential innovation barriers associated with the GDPR will arguably cause a loss in growth and productivity at the level of the national economy. One indicator for this is the declining number of new start-ups in Germany (-15% from 2016 to 2018) (Theile and Creutzburg 2019). An interview study with young people found that concerns about data protection bureaucracy represent one key reason for this downward trend (Koch 2019).
4. The manifold drawbacks of the GDPR seem to motivate German politicians to suggest exceptions, for example, related to work safety, finance/taxation, health (see also point 7 above), education (e.g., fine-grained databases to analyze reasons of early school leaving), housing and protection of tenants, homeland security, or defense. For Germany and Austria, one potential solution to this problem may be found in the use of escape clauses (see point 2 above) in order to “take the fright from the GDPR”. Or, more generally, to protect citizens and companies alike from ‘shady’ law firms. In this regard, it is noteworthy that very different organizations – such as the Social Democratic Party (SPD), the Christian Democratic/Social Unions (CDU/CSU), the Association of Self-Employed Entrepreneurs, the Union of Liberal Middle Class, and other powerful interest groups – are aiming at making amendments to the GDPR (Heide and Neuerer 2018). The uncertain outcomes of these efforts, however, further contribute to the overall legal uncertainty.
5. Finally, at a more abstract level, the GDPR mirrors a general problem with the EU: Given the gigantic bureaucracy in Brussels (with around 50,000 people currently being employed across all EU institutions, agencies, and bodies), there are many politicians and employees who – because of their education, socialization, and professional experience – seem to have difficulties in understanding and relating to the day-to-day problems of German entrepreneurs in general, and those of SMEs in particular. This phenomenon, for example, may be explained by Parkinson’s law, which has been applied to the growth of bureaucracy in all kinds of organizations.

In conclusion, numerous present challenges resulting from the GDPR can be attributed to the problem that too many guidelines, decrees, and court decisions are intertwined and, in the worst case, contradict one another. In addition, GDPR rules require careful consideration within a short time span, straining the capacities of specialists in corporate management, legislative bodies, public administration, and the system of justice. Recent examples include the EU regulation concerning the use of electronic evidence, the decision of the European Court of Justice concerning the detailed documentation of working hours, the complex regime of country-by-country reporting, the EU guideline PSD2 concerning online payments, the A1 certificate to document the social security status of cross-border commuters, as well as the EU money-laundering guideline. To address existing GDPR challenges, one not trivial but feasible approach might be that the European Commission decided on clear priorities based on urgency. Similar to a state-of-the-art production planning and supply chain system in manufacturing, this approach would help prevent overburdening the above-mentioned national organizations, especially in critical situations, and also help ensure that the overall ‘quality’ of politics, law, public administration, and corporate management does not suffer.

# 4.1 What Can BISE Do?

A first step could be to develop a cost–benefit analysis or a forecast of the implications for modules of regulations where several alternatives exist. For example, Germany could have one data protection institution at the federal level versus one data protection office in each state. This task is not trivial, but seems feasible. Maybe knowledge