# 3 Challenges with GDPR from the Enterprise Perspective – Building a Dedicated (Personal) Data Management Capability

Christine Legner, Clément Labadie, Faculty of Business and Economics (HEC), University of Lausanne

The GDPR represents a mindset shift in data protection regulation, and the controversial debates have not ended since it came into effect in May 2018. While some of the criticism is justified, the GDPR is a necessary and important step towards establishing data privacy in the digital economy. First, the regulation introduces greater accountability for organizations and enforces established data privacy principles that have hardly been respected in the past. Second, the GDPR gives individuals greater choice and control over their data, and thus promotes their data sovereignty. As the strictest and most farsighted approach to data protection, the GDPR has not only had a major impact on Europe, but also on an international scale and has become a “blueprint” for emerging data protection regulations in other countries.

The GDPR has been heavily criticized, and part of the coverage it has received focuses on the difficulties in implementing it, with many considering the induced strain to be excessive, especially for small and medium size enterprises. Even more than one year after the GDPR came into effect, companies are far from being at ease with the regulation. A study conducted mid-2019 among more than 1100 executives across ten countries and eight sectors reported that only 28% of the responding organizations were compliant with the GDPR at that time, with 30% close to be compliant (Capgemini Research Institute 2019). The study also emphasizes that non-compliance is a worldwide, cross-sector issue, with increasing risks in terms of both direct fine costs and reputational damage. In dealing with the GDPR, enterprises mostly followed a pragmatic approach, addressing visible and pressing compliance issues (e.g. adapting web forms, newsletters and contracts), to achieve a basic level of compliance. However, with this approach, it is almost impossible to address the more sophisticated legal demands, specifically the information processing rights and accountability requirements, or to proactively react to violations. Fortunately, there are also some exceptions; i.e., organizations that are committed to their data responsibility and the ethical treatment of data beyond regulatory requirements, such as Mastercard1 or Zurich Insurances2 that are using data protection as a competitive differentiator.

1 https://newsroom.mastercard.com/press-releases/mastercard-establishes-principles-for-data-responsibility/

2 https://www.zurich.com/en/about-us/corporate-governance/code-of-conduct

The difficulties with the GDPR can be explained by the changing nature of data protection regulations. In contrast to previous regulations that could be addressed by amending contracts and general conditions, the GDPR requires companies to fundamentally rethink the way they store and process personal data on an enterprise-wide level. Hence, the GDPR is essentially about processing sensitive personal data in the enterprise – and more precisely data about customers, employees and vendors. Achieving enterprise-wide data transparency is challenging for organizations with distributed operations, that, as large as they may be, remain a single point of contact for individuals. Managers often do not have a complete picture of the data stored on heterogeneous systems and do not know how they are used in business processes either. How to correctly handle data access requests if it is not possible to locate all data records? How to explain to individuals how an organization will process their data if nobody actually knows? These questions illustrate the typical difficulties in dealing with the GDPR.

Research in the Competence Center Corporate Data Quality (CC CDQ) reveals that the GDPR requires companies to build a dedicated data management capability (Labadie and Legner 2019). Based on the interpretation of legal texts and practical insights from focus groups and GDPR projects, we identified the required sets of organizational and system capabilities to comply with the regulation. The system capabilities require to redesign data-processing systems and are often emphasized in the GDPR debate. They comprise the abilities (1) to clearly identify, classify and locate personal data in system landscapes (Manage protected data scope); (2) to collect consent and ensure consent-based processing of information (Manage consent); and (3) to process data according to EU-GDPR’s data rights and principles (Enable data information rights). Besides these system-related capabilities, the organizational capabilities establish the required processes and responsibilities. They include the abilities (1) to coordinate and execute data protection activities (Orchestrate data protection activities); (2) to record and evaluate sensitive processing activities, as well as to document system landscapes (Demonstrate compliant data processing); and (3) to disclose information to individuals and authorities (Disclose information). In fact, these capabilities are meant to establish sustained and efficient practices. Implementing these capabilities leads to an enhanced knowledge of personal data in organizations, as well as the way it is used through its processes and systems. We argue in this way it can also support compliance with other regulations, as well as other data-related initiatives.

For the BISE community, the emerging data protection regulations offer interesting research opportunities. From an enterprise perspective, key questions relate to both