# International Journal of Disaster Risk Science

knowledge to actively engage in public discourse (Selin et al. 2017). This is specifically important as the outcomes resulting from various forms of engagement are shaped by contextual factors (including socioeconomic, cultural, and institutional aspects), the design of the process, power dynamics encompassing the values and epistemologies of participants, and spatial and temporal scales (Reed et al. 2018). Wellstead and Biesbroek (2022) explained that successful climate change policy will depend on balancing stakeholder engagement and bureaucratic autonomy. Leyden et al. (2017) asserted that there is no one-size-fits-all solution for stakeholder engagement due to contextual factors presenting distinct challenges in each scenario. Furthermore, the participation process, in and of itself, has the potential to introduce biases that may advantage certain participants, whether intentionally or unintentionally. Wynne (2006) and Thorpe and Gregory (2010) argued that engagement may sometimes need to challenge existing power structures, adequately or genuinely open up policy decision-making processes. If not, stakeholder engagement or dialogues can be instrumentalized to rationalize predetermined decisions and approaches or as a convenient means of eliciting public opinions. Additionally, an emphasis on consensus can potentially stifle the consideration of alternative viewpoints, as Stirling (2008) and Chilvers (2010) noted, thereby disadvantaging minority perspectives.

Despite the extensive research on the use of a stakeholder approach in the public sector, the issue of power imbalances and hence the resultant variability in access to information, knowledge, and communication channels and stakeholder participation remains relatively unexamined. Yet, it is increasingly clear that such power imbalances give rise to the kind of “epistemic injustices” that make effective stakeholder participation almost impossible for those who have been marginalized, excluded, or silenced. Collingridge and Reeve (1986) contended that multiple layers of power and expertise conspire to shape public dialogue. For example, influential interest groups, often comprising the wealthy or those in positions of authority, can sway the outcomes of stakeholder engagement by determining which issues are subject to deliberation, how evidence ought to be interpreted, the types of expertise that are emphasized, and how views, information, or opinions are exchanged. This control of “agenda” by those in positions of power (Bachrach and Baratz 1962; Lukes 1974) and consequently the silencing or exclusion of less authoritative voices is one major cause of “epistemic injustice”; a concept hardly dealt with in the stakeholder literature and hence yet to receive much attention in the social sciences and especially within public administration and management studies.

Byskov (2021) identified five conditions whereby epistemic injustice may occur. These include unfair outcomes, unfair judgment about epistemic capacity, unfair denial of...