# Philosophy of Management

and redirect their wills (read: partly rule them) at every turn. All of this is compatible, of course, with the fact that working under a boss’s coercive control (in a non-physical sense of “coercion”) is nontrivially different from suffering cognitive or other losses under a pervasive division of labor. One need not assume that one must share Anderson’s moral concerns, and to the same degrees, to think that a Smithian account of corrupting work under the division of labor and Anderson’s account of the corrupting influence of dictatorial workplace power can be mutually supportive in interesting ways.

How much support, then, can Smith provide for Anderson’s position that bosses are pervasively dictatorial? So far, it might seem, very little. Smith several times suggests that employers tend to be positively responsive to the needs and interests of employees. True, Smith is well aware that employers conspire and connive to tilt the economy in their own directions: “Masters are always and every where in a sort of tacit, but constant and uniform combination, not to raise the wages of labour above their actual rate” (WN, p. 84). Moreover: “People of the same trade seldom meet together, even for merriment and diversion, but the conversation ends in a conspiracy against the publick, or in some contrivance to raise prices” (WN, p. 145). Still, Smith argues that it is not employers but the market to which laborers are ultimately beholden. “The real and effectual discipline which is exercised over a workman, is not that of his corporation, but that of his customers” (WN, p. 146). Smith argues that for the employer, what “restrains his frauds and corrects his negligence” is fear of losing employees or fear of losing customers (perhaps from inferior work performed by unhappy workers), which disciplines the employer and gives workers more leverage. Smith adds: “Each tradesman or artificer derives his subsistence from the employment, not of one, but of a hundred or a thousand different customers. Though in some measure obliged to them all, therefore, he is not absolutely dependent upon any one of them” (WN, p. 420). In these ways, we see that commercial society extends, rather than restricts, the independence of both customers and workers by diminishing the leverage any particular employer can have over them (Rasmussen 2008; Hanley 2009).

Wouldn’t Smith disagree, therefore, with Anderson’s claim that workers are “dominated” by their employers? Smith does appear leerier than Anderson of the claim that employees pervasively suffer from a “state of” small-r “republic unfreedom” in which they are subjected “to the arbitrary will of another”—that is, the will of their domineering bosses (Anderson 2017, p. 64). If republican freedom consists of “independence from arbitrary controlling power” (Coffee 2015: 46), Smith seems more optimistic that employees’ opt-out options level the republican-freedom playing field, helping employees to equalize their leverage. Employers who mistreat either their employees or their customers will soon see their employees or customers leave. Because employers want employees and customers, however, employers have considerable incentive, Smith thinks, to treat both groups well. There is, however, more here to consider.

It would be interesting to see whether workplace data from diverse cultures support Anderson’s argumentation. For similar discussion to Anderson’s, see Werhane (1985) and McCall and Werhane (2010).

On republicanism in political theory, see Anderson 2018 and Pettit 1997.

Anderson agrees, however, with the idea that consumers check the power of firms: “in market exchanges with the butcher, the brewer, and the baker, each party’s interests have standing in the eyes of the other. Each party expresses this recognition by appealing to the other’s interests as a reason for him to accept the exchange” (p. 4). Anderson is concerned, though, that the industrial revolution, which took place largely after Smith’s time, altered this “sunny egalitarian story” (p. 4). We argue that Smithian psychology nevertheless provides invaluable psychological machinery for an ethical diagnosis of post-Smithian production relations.