# Philosophy of Management

In full situations, we find this discord, this “antipathy” of sentiments, unpleasant (TMS, p. 75). Our moral sentiments are formed, then, according to Smith, by repeated interactions with others, and are honed by our repeated experiences of either sympathy or antipathy. The perspective of an “impartial spectator” that we form as a final judge or adjudicator of propriety and impropriety arises from a coalescence of inductive generalizations we make on the basis of our numerous discrete experiences of judging—our observations of us judging others, of others judging us, and of others judging others (Raphael 2007).

Crucially, this means that our mature moral sentiments, and what is embodied in the perspective of an “impartial spectator”—which for Smith constitutes our very conscience itself—arises from our actual experience with others. Our peer groups thus play an outsized role in generating for us what counts as “proper” and “improper,” what counts as acceptable judgments, sentiments, and behaviors and what do not. Smith claims that this process begins when we have the uncomfortable experience of others’ judging us negatively. This first happens when we are children, he thinks. Though our parents or caregivers might have indulged our demands for satisfaction of our desires when we were infants and toddlers (TMS, pp. 40 and 143), our playfellows are not so indulgent. When we experience a negative judgment from them, we experience, not a sympathy of sentiments, but an “antipathy” (TMS, pp. 75–6), and this is accompanied by an uncomfortable feeling of displeasure. Because we naturally desire sympathy of sentiments, however—and because experiencing this sympathy is naturally pleasing to us—an experience of antipathy of sentiments triggers a desire in us to reform and adapt our judgments, sentiments, and behavior to increase the chances of achieving sympathy and avoiding antipathy. This inaugurates what Smith calls the “great school of self-command” (TMS, p. 145), which is an education in how to think, perceive, and behave so that we can achieve sympathy of sentiments with our peers.

Two elements of this Smithian process of developing moral sentiments are particularly relevant here. First, the “education” we receive results from our experiences with others, which means that it depends markedly on others’ judgments, behaviors, and sentiments. Although all humans, Smith thinks, desire mutual sympathy of sentiments, nevertheless the particular signature of sentiments any of us develops is informed—perhaps even determined—by those groups of people with whom we regularly associate. Our society and our culture might, in some larger sense, have an influence on us, but because it is difficult to achieve a meaningful sympathy of sentiments with an entire society or culture, this influence is relatively weak. The influence on us of our particular peer groups is much stronger. We tend to adopt not only the dress, the mannerisms, the sense of humor, the argot, the taste in music and books and movies and politics, and so on, of our peer groups, but, to some not insignificant degree, we also adopt their proclivities, their preferences, and even their personalities.

Second, our adoption of the personality of our peer groups over time becomes internalized. What begins as a deliberate decision to seek out ways of achieving mutual sympathy of sentiments becomes routinized into habits and conventions, and in time even default rules of behavior. We come to see our adopted sentiments not merely as contingent strategies for achieving our desired mutual sympathy of sentiments; we come indeed to see them as correct. Eventually, at least some of these adopted sentiments become so ingrained in us.

13 It may be that, for Smith, both people around us and God’s eternal laws inform our consciences. This is a contested issue among Smith scholars, however. See Otteson (2002), Raphael (2007), and Oslington (2011).