# Philosophy of Management

(TMS, p. 84). Thus, for Smith, if no one assaults, enslaves, or kills me; if no one steals from me, trespasses upon my property, or uses or despoils my property without my consent; and if no one violates or breaches any voluntary agreement, contract, or promise made with or to me, then I am being treated justly—if not beneficently—and I am entitled to no more from my fellow citizens or from my government. Isaiah Berlin (2008 [1958], p. 173) attributes to both Smith and Locke a commitment to negative liberty, including the idea that “social harmony and progress [are] compatible with reserving a large area for private life over which neither the state nor any other authority must be allowed to trespass.”

To have “positive” freedom, in contrast, you must have—or, perhaps, someone must provide you with—the opportunity—and potentially the resources—required for you to fulfill what you are able to achieve. Here we encounter separate distinctions. (a) One distinction is “freedom from” interference versus “freedom to” act. The other is (b) freedom from interference versus freedom to act effectively, or being given opportunities or resources if needed to make such action possible. As Anderson puts it: “If you have positive freedom, you have a rich menu of options effectively accessible to you, given your resources” (2017, p. 45). On the positive view of freedom, an absence of active interference is necessary but not sufficient for you to be free. If you are in need of education, nutrition, or healthcare, for example, to achieve genuine happiness, to realize your authentic self, or to participate fully in social life or in a productive economy, then you are not fully free until you have access to those resources. A person without proper education, nutrition, or healthcare may be negatively free because not subject to injury or harm from another person; but she is not free to live her own life. Positive freedom accordingly requires more than merely being left alone.

As Berlin observes (2008 [1958], p. 179), a commitment to positive freedom, which he criticizes, recognizes “that it is possible, and at times justifiable, to coerce men in the name of some goal (let us say, justice or public health) which they would, if they were more enlightened, themselves pursue, but do not, because they are blind or ignorant or corrupt.” Positive freedom can thus permit or require us to “ignore the actual wishes” of people to steer their choices in a direction that some specified “we” see as superior (p. 180). Positive liberty can also require us to redistribute our own or others’ resources to enable others to approximate more closely their “higher nature” or “‘real’, or ‘ideal’, or ‘autonomous’ self” (p. 179).

To be sure, neither Anderson’s discussion of Smith on positive and negative liberty nor our own is intended to provide an exhaustive harmonization between Smith’s views and Berlin’s. Instead, the point is to show that although Berlin worries deeply about state attempts to secure positive freedom, his important distinction between (a) one’s “actual wishes” and (b) the wishes one would have if one could apprehend or realize one’s “higher nature” raises the prospect that one’s environment might alter, and indeed corrupt, one’s wishes and even one’s sense of self. And such corruption can arise precisely under the division of labor Smith describes. Meaningful workplace freedom is a form of autonomy (from the Greek “auto-nomos” for self-legislating or -ruling); while workers can be free in various ways, they will not be meaningfully free if their bosses stand ready to intervene.

7 Berlin (2008 [1958], p. 179) worried about states’ acting oppressively on behalf of citizens’ alleged “true” selves:

[T]he real self may be conceived as something wider than the individual. . as a social ‘whole’ of which the individual is an element or aspect. . [and this] entity is then identified as being the ‘true’ self which, by imposing its collective, or ‘organic,’ single will upon its recalcitrant ‘members,’ achieves its own, and therefore their, ‘higher’ freedom.