# Philosophy of Management

The word “governments” in connection with businesses is telling. What goes on in firms, she says, is not merely organizational or even supervisory: it is, in the relevant ways, coercive. Thus, she writes, it “is what I call private government”— government of employees sans meaningful consent (ibid.; italics in the original). Anderson is hence calling for a fundamental reorientation of our thinking about freedom and domination.

The focus on the state has, of course, a long provenance. Consider, for example, the libertarian wing of political philosophy, which sees the state as the principal threat to liberty (Nozick 1974; Lester 2000; Skoble 2008). It is the state that has a monopoly on coercive power; it is the state that enforces its laws and regulations by threatening or using violence (Huemer 2013; Brennan 2016). Thus, if people have rights, natural or otherwise, to freedom, the state itself is the primary threat and hence the primary target of broadly libertarian concern. A corollary is that private associations, including businesses, are qualitatively different from the state. A private association cannot make you join it. A business cannot make you work for it. In both cases, you enjoy an “opt-out” or exit option: you can say “no, thank you” to any proposal or offer and go elsewhere if you choose (Hirschman 1970; Cowen 2017; Taylor 2017; Otteson 2019a; Robson 2023). Accordingly, if you voluntarily choose to join a private organization or work for a business, you ipso facto voluntarily accept responsibility to conform to the organization’s or business’s mission, rules, and authorities. Thus, you no longer have reasonable grounds of complaint. If you do not like your employer’s rules, you can quit and go elsewhere.

Anderson challenges this story. She claims that businesses are like “a government that assigns almost everyone a superior whom they must obey” (2017, p. 37). And, she adds, one’s superiors “are unaccountable to those they order around” (p. 37). Anderson argues that this form of governance is “communist,” and “the control that this government exercises over its members is pervasive” (p. 38). She acknowledges the libertarian claim that people can leave a firm if they wish—“[i]ndividuals are also free to emigrate” (ibid.)—but, she says, if one leaves, not only is there “usually no going back” but, because most (or all) such organizations are run as “communist” dictatorships, a worker’s only real option is “to immigrate to another communist dictatorship” (ibid.). So while workers may indeed have options, they have no real alternative. It is dictatorships all the way down. Like other thinkers who focus only on the state, libertarians thus suffer, she argues, from “hemiagnosia,” “like those patients who cannot perceive one-half of their bodies” (p. 58). For libertarians are unable or unwilling to perceive the dictatorial nature of half (or more) of people’s economic lives: the roughly two thousand hours every year that millions of people work who spend 40 h per week, 50 weeks per year on the job.

In defending a further argument for Anderson’s thesis, we provide in § 1 and § 2 a fuller exposition of the value of Adam Smith’s thought in the broader quest to understand workplace degradation today. The culmination is our discussion in § 3 of the “dominance dynamic” in business. What is it? Why do Anderson and Smith oppose it? And, why must it stop? We will show why Smithian thought is perhaps the best available resource for explaining the deleterious dominance dynamic, why it pervades commercial society, and why it is often invisible, like a toxin in the air we breathe.

2 Max Weber (1958, p. 78, italics in the original) famously defined the state as “a human community that (successfully) claims the monopoly of the legitimate use of physical force within a given territory.”

3 There are further complexities here. For example, rules of employment can change in ways to which employees have not agreed even if they agreed to the original rules.