# Monsanto, PCBs, and the Recreation of a World-Wide Ecological Concern

parts per million forcing the FDA to consider lowering its allowable limits which stood at five parts per million [214].

Also in early December 1975, Dow Chemical disclosed plans to market a new insulating fluid that it said could replace the controversial chemicals known as PCBs, in high-voltage-power capacitors. Dow estimated that this new fluid could replace perhaps six to eight million of the estimated forty million pounds of the PCBs produced in the U.S. annually [215]. The EPA-sponsored conference, according to the Los Angeles Times, helped to stimulate a growing body of opinion that PCBs represent an increasing health hazard and should be banned entirely. The Los Angeles Times noted that although the conference took no formal stand on the ban of the chemical, some organizations such as the National Fisheries Institute, Inc., the lobbying organization for 550 companies that package and market seafoods also endorsed a total ban [209].

By the end of 1975, Russell Train, the EPA Administrator, was calling for a voluntary ban on PCBs noting that although the EPA didn’t have any authority to order that PCB use be discontinued, it could control their discharge into the nation’s waterways. He was quoted by the Wall Street Journal as saying that the public has to understand that we have a hell of a problem and nothing this agency can do will solve it for a long time [216]. The Chicago Tribune quoted Train as describing PCBs as a significant hazard to human health and the environment. According to the paper, he urged moving toward totally eliminating the use of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) as rapidly as possible [217]. Train called for dramatic actions in order to stem the problem of environmental pollution from PCBs. He noted that since the beginning of its production in 1929, there had been approximately 700 million pounds of PCBs produced of which 300 million pounds still remain in the air, water and soil. PCBs, he noted, caused tumors, skin lesions, gastric disorders and miscarriages in mammals. He announced an action plan to reduce levels of production and discharge and to seek an eventual halt of all production and use in the United States. Train directed EPA Regional Offices to crack down on PCB discharge by manufacturers and large scale users of the chemicals, and has called for voluntary self-regulation by both groups [218].

The tremendous public attention to PCBs and their impact on the environment in late 1975—and the calls for banning PCBs—led Monsanto to consider getting out of the PCB business entirely. The pressure was building. The Vice President and Managing Director of Monsanto’s Industrial Chemicals Company, Francis J. Fitzgerald, told the Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer of Monsanto, John W. Hanley, of these mounting pressures. For one thing, the EPA has called Chicago hearings with the idea of making Monsanto an example. For another, Fitzgerald explained that the issue is coming to a head because of a series of recent tests tentatively show PCBs when building in animals apparently create a carcinogenic effect. [Emphasis in the original] In response, Hanley asked Fitzgerald to consider using the Corporate PR Department to make a judgment as to PCBs adverse impact on Monsanto. The study should address the point as to whether we should get out of the PCB business as a deliberate move [219, 220].

Six weeks later, the Monsanto PCB Study Group presented its report concerning the past, current and future impact upon Monsanto’s image of PCB.