G. Markowitz, D. Rosner

meet ‘68 sales requirements; (2) Start-up new manufacturing facilities to enable us to meet future sales requirements” [89].

Monsanto was faced by two competing needs: the first was to expand the market for Aroclors; the second was to figure out a way of protecting itself from the increasing evidence that PCBs were a widespread environmental pollutant. The environmental issue began to loom larger and larger in the thinking of Monsanto officials. In November 1968, an “Outline PCB Environmental Pollution Abatement Plan,” noted that PCBs were “already present in nature having done their ‘alleged damage’.” Monsanto worried about the “Legal Liability” and the possibility of lawsuits because “All customers using the products have not been officially notified about known effects nor [do] our labels carry this information. These are only a few of the possible legal implications which would best be covered by the legal department” [90].

Increasingly, Monsanto worried about its public image, an issue that would become increasingly prominent over the next few years. “The corporate image of Monsanto as a responsible member of the business world genuinely concerned with the welfare of our environment will be adversely affected with increased publicity,” a report on the PCB Environmental Abatement Plan warned. “The evidence proving the persistence of these compounds and their universal presence as residues in the environment is beyond questioning. This combined with certain scare publications is certain to give an adverse image.” Monsanto was worried that PCBs would be linked in the public mind with the controversy then whirling around DDT and thus PCBs would be “guilty by association.” “Some customers who presently use these materials will be ‘scared’ [off] to other competitive products. Products associated with the same name or ‘trademark’ will be adversely affected.” The plan warned that Monsanto’s products, Therminol, Pydraul, and Aroclor would lose market share to competitors who “will use the information as a competitive advantage” [91].

Monsanto had reason to be concerned. DDT was under attack and, in the words of one author in 1969, the tide has been running against DDT ever since Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring appeared in 1962. In fact, Carson specifically identified DDT as a possible human carcinogen. DDT production was at its peak then – 183 million pounds – and by 1967 it shrank to 103 million, 70% of which was exported.

Some of DDT’s defenders had “raised the possibility that DDT may be taking the rap for PCB…, a plasticizing agent widely used by industry” [91].

By the end of 1968, the growing attention to environmental pollution led Monsanto to focus more and more on the “legal-political problems facing Aroclor.” In a memo from W. R. Richard of Monsanto’s Research Center in the Organic Division to W. A. Kuhn, Richard noted “the accusations in the literature that chlorinated biphenyls are poisoning and killing wildlife.” This was not a trivial issue, he remarked, because “these wildlife people have to be taken seriously. They have taken the DDT industry to court in Wisconsin to prevent the use and sale of DDT …and