G. Markowitz, D. Rosner

P.S. We repeatedly find that users of formulations prepared for a specific use will apply the material for other uses. In other words, even though Monsanto may encourage the use of Aroclor in pesticide formulations for non-agricultural use you can rest assured that some of it will be used on agricultural commodities. For these reasons alone it is strongly recommended that we state very specifically in any Monsanto literature, including correspondence, that Aroclors not be used on agricultural commodities. I believe our Legal Department will confirm that there is an important legal aspect involved [37].

In 1950 Monsanto’s medical Director, Emmet Kelly, wrote to Indiana’s director of industrial hygiene that the company “advised protection against all Aroclor fumes when an elevated temperature is used” [38]. Around the same time, Monsanto reissued its warnings about chlorinated hydrocarbons in general and Aroclors specifically. The company warned that Aroclors should not be heated in open vessels above 300° because of possible skin and eye irritation and because “prolonged and repeated exposure to such fumes may, in addition to causing irritation, interfere with the normal skin functions and result indirectly in physiological disturbances” [39].

For most of the 1950s Monsanto continued to warn about the potential skin problems with Aroclors, but downplayed the systemic effects of inhaling PCB vapors. By early 1952 the dangers from chlorinated diphenyls were so well established that Monsanto entered into an agreement with the United States Public Health Service to insert a warning in all bills of sales. The warning stated,

This product is sold under direct agreement with the U.S. Public Health Service and if re-sold as such or in mixture thereof for further fabrication within the United States, it is necessary that such products be labeled as follows: ‘This package contains (Name of Product) AVOID REPEATED CONTACT WITH THE SKIN AND INHALATION OF THE FUMES AND DUSTS.’

But Monsanto officials acknowledged privately that their “bills of sale do not carry the notation as given in the second part of the agreement noted above,” even though the dangers from inhalation of Aroclor were prevalent since “so many of the new Aroclor applications involve their use at elevated temperatures.” Further, they pointed out that while “the toxicity hazard of Aroclor’s fumes is well established,” Monsanto had encountered “violations” of safety precautions quite frequently and that therefore “keeping in touch with these things [is] a major responsibility in the promotion of Aroclors.” The company recognized that the subject of Aroclor’s toxicology was “not the easiest one in the world to understand” but stated very clearly Monsanto’s responsibility to live up to what had emerged as industry standards to test for potential dangers of their products and to warn workers and consumers how to protect themselves against those dangers. Because they had such a “large stake” in Aroclors and because of the “rather widespread commercial use” of Aroclors “we constantly strive to learn more about this subject of Aroclor toxicology and to safeguard against any possible hazards” [40]. Yet, at this point, Monsanto had not yet done any long-term chronic toxicity studies.