G. Markowitz, D. Rosner

Berteau did consult a statistician, A.W. Dickenson from Monsanto’s General Offices, who provided his assessment of both the NCI Bioassay and Monsanto’s proposed statements about it. Dickinson wrote, “it is definitely not legitimate to state that ‘NCI has determined that Monsanto’s PCB is not carcinogenic’. All they have done,” Dickenson explained, “is fail to demonstrate conclusively that it is carcinogenic. If we must make some statement, I would prefer your [Berteau] ‘there is no conclusive evidence that PCBs cause cancer’.” Dickenson was even more circumspect. “I would have some qualms about releasing this statement without the qualifying (p. 62) ‘it is suggested that Aroclor 1254 may be a tumor promoter’.” He concluded “perhaps the best position is to make no public statement.” Dickenson explained the bar that statisticians set for claiming causation was high and that the fact that the NCI study did not meet the criteria, may have simply been because of the small sample size. “In view of the fact that the power of the individual comparisons is limited by the small group sizes, I would view the presence of the positive dose-related trend as a strong warning that the substance may be carcinogenic.” In the handwritten note at the top of Dickinson’s memo, one of the Monsanto people who received these reports wrote: “You sure these guys work for us?” [228]

Despite having solicited the opinions of their own in-house experts and having received very explicit warnings about what they could and could not say about the NCI study’s conclusions, Monsanto’s Director of Communications, Dan Bishop, saw fit to ignore their advice. In a letter to H.L. Stevenson, the Editor-in-Chief and Vice President of United Press International, the news service that distributed information and articles to hundreds of news outlets throughout the country and the world, Bishop complained about “stories treating the subject of PCBs [that] repeatedly referred to them as ‘cancer-causing agents’.” Bishop wrote that “according to no less an authority than HEW’s National Cancer Institute, PCB is not a cancer-causing agent.” He claimed that while environmental pollution was a real concern, his correction was “an honest attempt to set the record straight and avoid creating needless, unwarranted further alarm. You could aid us greatly in the endeavor by communicating this information to your bureaus” [229].

Bishop continued to try to allay concerns about PCBs relationship to cancer. In a memo to a group of Monsanto’s public relations directors in October 1980, Bishop enclosed a memo, “PCB Hazards-Facts and Fallacies,” that said “we circulated… widely, last week to local news media contacts in an all-out attempt to get them off the ‘cancer-causing’/‘deadly toxin’ kick. And, I’m happy to report, with guarded optimism, that we’re making some headway.” The enclosure, a “Note to Editors from Monsanto Company,” argued “the ‘cancer-causing’ label resulted from a single animal study conducted by a Public Health Service researcher in 1975—and later discredited by peer review. The cancer stigma has persisted, however, despite this and the results of a later animal study performed by the National Cancer Institute [226]. The conclusion of the NCI study was that PCBs were not cancer-causing compounds” [emphasis in the original] [230].

In an internal newsletter for workers at Monsanto’s Krummrich plant that produced PCBs from the 1930s through the mid-1970s, Monsanto sought to calm workers’ concerns about the material they worked with every day. One worker