524 G. Markowitz, D. Rosner

EPA’s concern that “PCBs are widely contaminating the environment … three years after the government thought it had them ‘well in hand’.” [207]

Even though Monsanto was questioning Kimbrough’s study, their own people at IBT agreed with her findings. At a meeting at the US National Cancer Institute (NCI) on January 31, 1975, attended by Kimbrough, two representatives of the NCI, two from IBT, and George Levinkas of Monsanto, they reviewed Dr. Kimbrough’s study. The representatives of Industrial BioTest “reviewed sections of liver from all animals in the study.” They concluded, “to a large extent, substantially the same type of lesions were observed in both [IBT’s and NCI’s] studies except that the lesions seemed to be more advanced in Kimbrough’s study. Although there was some variation in terminology, the findings were reasonably close.” Unambiguously, Levinskas wrote, “there were definite liver adenocarcinomas in Kimbrough’s study. Dr. Richter [IBT] expressed the view later that two animals in our study approached the type of lesion Kimbrough had observed….” [208]. Levinskas saw this as a defeat: “as an observer, I wanted to get the reaction of BIO-TEST’s pathologist before deciding what to do. There was no opportunity to caucus while at NCI. After we left, and they conceded the occurrence of hepatic carcinomas, there was little else to do” [208].

In November 1975, the EPA sponsored a three-day conference of over 400 federal, state, local officials, public interest and environmental organizations [209] in Chicago on PCBs where it was disclosed by Thomas E. Kopp, a chemist with the EPA’s Office of Toxic Substances, that plants were discharging PCBs directly into rivers and streams in New Bedford, Massachusetts; Bloomington, Indiana; Sharon, Pennsylvania; Pickens, South Carolina; Pittsfield, Massachusetts; Fort Edward, New York; Hudson Falls, New York; and Totowa, New Jersey. In addition, Monsanto and another company were discharging PCBs into the sewage treatment systems of Sauget, Illinois, and Bridgeport, Connecticut [210]. The conference also heard that “perhaps 41–45% of all Americans had … PCBs in their tissues” and that PCBs “had also been found in human milk” [211].

Two scientists from the EPA’s ecological monitoring branch reported that that percentage had risen from 35.1% in 1973 [209]. On the final day of the conference in November 1975, Nathaniel Reed, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior, raised the stakes even further when he stated that “the Federal Government must impose a ban on the use … [of PCBs] except in certain electrical equipment.” He said that PCBs “should be confined to electrical transformers and capacitors” because “the nation’s rivers and lakes were ‘in mortal danger’” from PCBs. Even this limited use should be considered temporary and “all substitutes must be evaluated so that PCBs can be completely eliminated from industrial use.” The Assistant Secretary continued, that he was “’deeply shocked by the pervasiveness by PCBs; they are literally everywhere’. He said he was ‘very troubled by the exceedingly high levels found in fish from all our drainage systems’.” [212]

Monsanto’s internal memo regarding an EPA press conference the following month (December 1975) included “EPA’s comment: PCBs are 20 times more persistent than DDT. They cause tumors in animals. They are laying in the environment, in the sediment in the bottom of lakes and rivers where they are like a delayed action time bomb waiting to go off. We may have to live with them for the rest of our lives” [213]. Around this time Canada reduced its allowable limit of PCBs in fish to two.