that no new chemical is used in a manner in which systemic toxicity or skin irrita-

tion might result either in workers making the product or in consumers” [30]. In

fact, in 1957, Jack Garrett, Monsanto’s industrial hygienist (who would later become

manager of Pollution Abatement and Industrial Hygiene at the company), published

an article in Industrial Wastes in which he identified the responsibilities of compa-

nies to test their products for danger to humans and the environment:

When a new product is to be manufactured it behooves the manufacturing

plant to determine the effect, if any, of the waste products on the receiving

stream. The determinations should answer the following questions: 1. Will the

effluent, as discharged, adversely affect human life? 2. Will the effluent, as dis-

charged, adversely affect aquatic life? The effects referred to here are of a more

insidious nature. What, for example, would be the long term effects on human

life of drinking water containing X concentration of a certain compound over a

period of many years?

He specifically addressed the importance of doing “chronic toxicity” studies to know

what the long-term effects of materials may be [31].

In fact, by the 1940s there were hundreds of chemicals that had been tested for

cancer and numerous studies were undertaken to evaluate the cancer risks in indus-

try. Wilhelm Hueper, the former medical director of Dupont, published in 1942

Occupational Tumors and Allied Diseases, a massive 800-page text reviewing these

studies [32]. In addition, the National Cancer Institute which Hueper would soon

join, surveyed the literature of the potential carcinogenic properties of 696 chemi-

cals, 169 of which were reported to be potential carcinogens. Their survey was sum-

marized in the IHF’s Industrial Hygiene Digest, and sent to all its members [33].

# New uses for PCBs in the post-war era: environmental contamination and systemic toxicity in the 1950s

While PCBs were already used in the emerging electrical industry, Monsanto found

other potential markets for its product. This section explores the variety of industrial

and consumer products that PCBs found their way into, most of which could and did

become environmental pollutants. In addition, it explores the growing worry that

PCBs were a potential cause of systemic disease in humans.

The end of World War II marked the end of a long period of austerity for most

Americans. For 15 years (1930–1945), the consumer economy had been at a virtual

standstill as economic Depression, combined with the focus on war production con-

tinued to stymie consumer demand. But that was about to end as the United States

experienced a sustained period of economic growth (1945–1970). This demand was

seized upon by chemical and electrical manufacturers, in particular, who claimed

that Americans would experience “Better Living Through Chemistry” and that

“Progress Is Our Most Important Product.” In 1946, Monsanto joined in running

a full page color ad in the Saturday Evening Post, one of the nation’s leading mass

circulation magazines, that detailed to readers the numerous materials and consumer