G. Markowitz, D. Rosner

Despite the Navy’s rejection of Pydraul 150 on health grounds, Monsanto continued to reassure their customers that the material was safe. For example, in a letter from Elmer Wheeler, Assistant Director of the Medical Department, to James Lofstrom at Standard Oil’s corporate headquarters at 30 Rockefeller Center in New York, Wheeler did not mention the Navy studies. Instead, Wheeler wrote that “the toxicity report on Pydraul 150 indicates that it is practically innocuous when fed orally to rats …. In rabbit skin and eye irritation studies Pydraul 150 was no more irritating than a 10% soap solution tested similarly” [58]. Also, in a May 1957 Monsanto Technical Bulletin, Monsanto wrote “Animal toxicity studies and 20 years of manufacturing and use experience indicate that Aroclor compounds are not serious industrial hazards” [59].

In 1958, other major corporations shared the Navy’s concerns about Pydraul. That year some states passed labeling laws which were “brought forcibly to [Monsanto’s] attention” by the Socony Mobil Corporation that requested a caution stamp to “be affixed to all Pydraul which they purchase from Monsanto for resale.” Monsanto worried about the wording which Socony Mobil was planning to use on their product for it was “not in the best interest of Pydraul sales, and is such that our competition could use to great advantage.” They were specifically concerned that the label identified chlorinated hydrocarbons with danger from breathing and physical contact. Monsanto’s label was simpler and much less specific, telling customers simply, “Avoid prolonged and repeated contact with skin. Avoid prolonged breathing of vapors and dust.” Monsanto stated quite explicitly (but privately) that they wanted to comply with the necessary regulations, but to comply with the minimum and not to give any unnecessary information which could very well damage our sales position in the synthetic hydraulic fluid field…. I am requesting that you and Mr. Carpari discuss what is necessary from the labeling viewpoint and the legal side, in order to comply, but yet maintain our excellent position in this field [60].

In June 1959, Emmet Kelly wrote to Monsanto’s O.F. Heasel about the company’s attempt to promote “the sale of Pydraul AC [another hydraulic fluid that contained PCBs] in Germany.” He was concerned about German attitudes about toxic substances.

If these Germans are afraid of mineral oil, I feel they will be rather suspicious of Pydraul AC. After all, the constituents are considerably more toxic than mineral oil. The odor or taste would be considerably more marked than mineral oil, should any of the material get into the food.

Kelly believed that Monsanto had to “be factual and tell them that Pydraul AC has an LD 50 to rats of 40 gm./kg and in rats 31/2 gm. to 41/2 gm/kg.” Kelly suggested that “if, however, there is a possibility that vapors would enter the food or beverage, a filter should be incorporated in the line.” He wrote that a charcoal filter would be able to absorb “organic vapors and any objectionable odors.” He concluded that he thought “the Germans are being overcautious in this matter.